Early in my tenure as the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI),
Krishan Chopra of HarperCollins asked me to write a book. He suggested
putting together edited versions of my past articles and speeches under different
themes. I pleaded that I was extremely busy, and simply did not have the time.
As my term came to an end, however, I realized time would be less of a
constraint. In the speeches I gave while at the RBI, I had been describing the
reforms we were undertaking and the rationale behind them, both to build
confidence amongst investors and to get support from the public. If I could link
the speeches together in a book with commentary about what prompted each
speech, I could give the youth of the country a feel for the excitement of working
at the central bank. I hoped this would attract a few into the area of economics
and finance, where India really needs more good people. Moreover, if I could
describe the overall rationale for what had been done, completed reforms could
stand a better chance of not being reversed, while incomplete reforms could be
finished.
I did not want to intrude on my successor’s initial engagement with the
public, so I determined to stay silent on India for a year. This book will be
published after that year is over. Also, while I have tried to explain my rationale
for various speeches and actions through linking commentary, I have respected
the privacy of conversations I had with various public figures. I have also added
a short selection of some speeches and articles that I wrote, primarily while I
was the Chief Economist at the International Monetary Fund, but also while at
Chicago’s Booth School of Business before I joined the RBI.
The title of this book reflects the serendipitous nature of public life. I enjoyed
the give-and-take of press conferences after monetary policy meetings,
especially because I knew most of the reporters. As one press conference was
ending, I was asked (yet again) by a familiar face whether I was dovish like
Yellen or hawkish like Volcker. I understood what the reporter was asking, but I
wanted to push back on the attempt to pigeonhole me into existing stereotypes.
Somewhat jokingly, I started in a James Bond-ish vein, ‘My name is Raghuram
Rajan…’ To my horror, mid-sentence I realized I did not know how to end in a
way that did not reveal more on monetary policy than I intended. So with TV
cameras trained on me, I ended lamely ‘…and I do what I do’. For some reason,
that sentence became the financial press headline the next day, with the details of
our monetary policy relegated to the inside columns. The commentary on social
media even reached my usually supportive daughter, who emphasized her
negative reaction to my unwitting sentence with repeated thumbs-down emojis!
In a sense, though, the headline was apt. Two different governments had
largely given me free rein at the Reserve Bank, reposing their trust in me.
Knowing I had a three-year term, I could push hard for change. Eventually, the
usual opposition from vested interests would build up, but I hoped the RBI
would complete much of the needed reforms by then. And indeed it did.
I came into office during the currency crisis, when India was termed one of
the Fragile Five. So my first task was stabilization. But right from the beginning,
I realized that the prospect of financial sector reforms would be an aid to
stabilization. With India making the transition from low-income to middleincome country, the need for these reforms was clear. Of course, reforms are an
ongoing process, and they can be reversed. This was why it was important to
embody the reforms in new institutional mechanisms, as well as build ownership
of reforms within the RBI and amongst external stakeholders.
And that brings me to teamwork. This was not my first job in management.
But I became head of an organization of 17,000 people, with assets of more than
$400 billion. How does one manage such a large organization? Obviously with
help. I have always found that the single most important task in management is
to pick good deputies, and I managed to get very good ones. My role was to set
the overall agenda (of course, in consultation with them), get the concurrence of
the government, draw out the vast experience of my colleagues to fill out the
details and rule out inadvisable steps, push and prod the organization where
necessary so that we stuck to timelines, and then roll out the measures after
engaging with stakeholders, including the public.
We did not undertake reforms by stealth. While the full import of some of the
actions we took may not have been obvious early on, making it harder for
opposition to crystallize, the roadmap for much of what we did was set by
various RBI-appointed committees, advertised in public speeches, and then
implemented after discussion with stakeholders. We were always willing to
listen to alternative proposals from them, but any suggestion had to pass my test
of economic or financial commonsense, and my colleagues’ test of meeting
sensible central and commercial banking practice, before it was accepted. By
and large, these dual filters helped us screen out unhelpful suggestions.
Our reforms were guided by the need to increase the role of markets and
improve competition, to ensure we had the right regulations and the regulations
were enforced in a predictable and transparent way, and to do all this in a
measured but steady way so that the system could adjust. As I will explain, this
is broadly how we dealt with issues ranging from inflation management to
resolving distressed loans. Throughout, our attempt was to institutionalize
processes so that they would be both predictable and enduring. India is
becoming a large middle income country, too complex and varied to be
controlled centrally. The government will need to withdraw from occupying the
commanding heights of the economy, confining itself to providing public goods
and the governing framework, and leaving economic activity to the people. To
harness their collective energy, India will need many such reforms in the years to
come if it is to grow rapidly in a sustainable and equitable way.
My speeches were an essential part of the stabilization and reform process,
allowing me to explain the rationale for change to investors and the public, flag
the building blocks of the reform, and draw in opinion leaders into the debate
while the specific regulations were being drafted. The additional value of
describing what we intended to do and delivering on it repeatedly was that it
allowed the RBI to get credit for the intended reform from the market at the time
of announcement, much before the time of delivery. This could prove crucial if
markets became volatile again. Also, many speeches tried to educate the broader
public on the underlying finance and economics. If someone got drawn by a
speech into learning more, that was one more step towards spreading financial
and economic literacy – I had what every teacher wants, a national platform, one
I tried to use effectively and responsibly.
I also used my speeches to partly fulfil another important role the RBI has,
that of managing macroeconomic risk for the country. This objective, as we will
see, led to speeches that proved more controversial, perhaps because I was
speaking outside the usual areas of central banking and regulation, and perhaps
because some of my warnings were surprisingly seen as challenges to the
government. Nevertheless, I saw these speeches as part of the Governor’s
responsibility as the primary technocrat managing macroeconomic risk for the
country.
Being an academic, I wrote all my speeches myself. My wife, Radhika,
suffered through early drafts of many speeches, offering constructive criticism. I
then had the relevant subject matter expert at the RBI look at the speech to check
for accuracy, followed by a read from my very able executive assistant (first, the
ever-dependable Vivek Aggarwal who was succeeded by Vaibhav Chaturvedi).
Finally, after Alpana Killawala, our Chief General Manager for
Communications, took a pass screening for possible political controversy, I made
final touches and delivered the speech.
Press attention was always intense, even in locales that the press were
supposed to be excluded from – someone present would always be willing to
speak to the press or post on social media. Much of the press attention was
perhaps initially in the hope that I would offer tit-bits on the direction of future
monetary policy, but as the press realized I did not speak on new policy outside
monetary policy meetings, I like to believe that they came because the speeches
were interesting. At any rate, press attention was a double-edged sword, as we
will see. While it allowed me to get the RBI’s messages out easily, a
misunderstood speech or misinterpreted comment could make headlines and
create unnecessary frictions. I saw this as an unavoidable cost of public
engagement, but I did sometimes question whether the misinterpretation was
accidental or deliberate.
The job of Governor is probably the most fulfilling job any Indian economist
could aspire for. There were many days when I went home tired but happy that
we had really made a difference. There are very few jobs in public
administration where one can say this because one is always hemmed in by the
need to get the concurrence of other organizations, and turf battles make it hard
to move forward. At the RBI, on many issues the decision was ours, and ours
alone, so progress was feasible and continuous. This also meant that the job
weighed constantly on my mind, for I had to keep asking what more we could
do, given the possibilities were endless. Putting a policy economist in the
Governor’s job is like letting a kid loose in a candy shop!
This is not to say that the job was always easy or enjoyable. While I enjoyed
a good understanding with the political leadership – meeting regularly and
cordially first with Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh and Finance Minister
Chidambaram, and then when the government changed, with Prime Minister
Narendra Modi and Finance Minister Jaitley – and while some bureaucrats were
a delight to work with, the least pleasant aspect of my job was dealing with
bureaucrats who were trying to undercut the Reserve Bank so as to expand their
turf. In my last speech as Governor (see later), I offered suggestions to the
government on how to reduce these unproductive frictions.
Any public job involves both undue praise and unfair criticism. It is human
nature to think the latter dominates the former. Yet it is also the latter that is
probably more useful in helping you sharpen your message. Much of the
material in these speeches is an implicit response to critics, an attempt to explain
why they do not have the full picture. To the extent that the criticism helped
further public understanding through the clarifying speeches I gave in response,
it had a silver lining. But over and above the ample rewards from the sense of
personal fulfilment the job affords, I continue to be pleasantly over-compensated
by the many students who tell me that they have been inspired to study
economics and finance, the unknown passengers on planes who thank me for my
work, and even by the security officer who stamps my boarding card as I leave
India and asks me when I am coming back to work in the country.
As I indicated earlier, this is not a ‘tell-all’. Before ending this introduction,
there is one issue, however, on which I have been asked many questions, which I
have resolutely refused to answer until my period of silence is over, and that is
the demonetization that was announced in India in November 2016. The
questions, which have reportedly also been asked by parliamentary committees,
include when I knew about the possibility of demonetization and what my view
on it was. The press, quoting government sources, have variously reported that I
was against it (in the early days of the demonetization process) and that I was
‘on board’ (in the most recent reports).
My only public commentary on the issue of demonetization was in response
to a question in August 2014 at the Lalit Doshi Memorial Lecture (see later). At
that time, the matter had not been broached by the government. As the
Hindustan Times reported*
In August, at the annual Lalit Doshi memorial lecture, Rajan said, ‘I am not quite sure if what you
meant is demonetise the old notes and introduce new notes instead. In the past, demonetisation has
been thought of as a way of getting black money out of circulation. Because people then have to come
and say ‘how do I have this 10 crores in cash sitting in my safe and they have to explain where they
got the money from. It is often cited as a solution. Unfortunately, my sense is, the clever find ways
around it.’
Rajan said, ‘Black money hoarders find ways to divide their hoard into many smaller pieces. You
find that people who haven’t thought of a way to convert black to white, throw it into the hundi in
some temples. I think there are ways around demonetisation. It is not that easy to flush out the black
money.’
A fair amount of unaccounted cash is typically in the form of gold and therefore even harder to
catch, said Rajan, adding that he would focus more on incentives that lead to generation and the
retention of black money. There were a lot of incentives on taxes and the current tax rate in the country
was for the most part reasonable, he added.
Given that various stances have been attributed to me, including in Parliament,
let me clarify. I was asked by the government in February 2016 for my views on
demonetization, which I gave orally. Although there might be long-term benefits,
I felt the likely short-term economic costs would outweigh them, and felt there
were potentially better alternatives to achieve the main goals. I made these views
known in no uncertain terms. I was then asked to prepare a note, which the RBI
put together and handed to the government. It outlined the potential costs and
benefits of demonetization, as well as alternatives that could achieve similar
aims. If the government, on weighing the pros and cons, still decided to go ahead
with demonetization, the note outlined the preparation that would be needed, and
the time that preparation would take. The RBI flagged what would happen if
preparation was inadequate.
The government then set up a committee to consider the issues. The deputy
governor in charge of currency attended these meetings. At no point during my
term was the RBI asked to make a decision on demonetization.
Enough said. Let me conclude this introduction with thanks. My wife was my
constant support in Mumbai, as she has been all our life together. She could be
relied upon to keep my feet firmly tethered to the ground, even while giving me
the advice I needed. My children, who came home occasionally during the
holidays, endured the absence of their parents, and helped give me a sense of
normalcy at home after being ‘The Governor’ in the office. My parents and
parents-in-law were an unconditional source of comfort, as always. I owe a debt
to my colleagues at the RBI, who worked tirelessly with me, and received my
family with warmth into their midst. And, finally, I thank Krishan Chopra of
HarperCollins, without whose perseverance this book would not have seen the
light of day, Siddhesh Inamdar for his careful editing, and Rajinder Ganju for his
typesetting.
Section I
RBI DAYS
CHAPTER 1
SETTING THE STAGE
I
I took over as the 23rd Governor of the Reserve Bank of India on 4 September 2013. The rupee had
been in free fall in August, inflation and the current account deficit were high. Even though Mr
Chidambaram, who had been brought back as Finance Minister in 2012 when Mr Pranab Mukherjee
became the President of India, had taken an axe to the fiscal deficit, it was still large. With elections
looming in May 2014, and the possibility of a hung parliament, investors were getting nervous. They
were quick to label India one of the ‘Fragile Five’ emerging markets during the market volatility that
followed Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s hint in May 2013 that the Fed was likely to start the process
of normalization of monetary policy. Having experienced the worst of that ‘Taper Tantrum’ while at
North Block, and having seen measure after measure to stabilize the currency fall flat, I thought it was
time to go all out. I wanted to send the message that India had strong institutions like the RBI that
could push reforms forward even when Parliament was stalled, and international investors should not
write India off.
My predecessor, Governor Subbarao, was gracious enough to allow me to spend most of August
2013 at the RBI, talking to my to-be colleagues and collecting possible ideas for reform measures.
There were plenty of ideas floating around in the corridors of the Reserve Bank, belying its reputation
for staid conservatism. Where necessary, these were discussed with my colleagues in the finance
ministry. I wanted to send four messages. First, we had to present a façade of confidence to assure the
public and investors that the RBI knew what had to be done. Second, we would emphasize our
commitment to bringing down inflation, which my friend, the Mexican central bank governor, Agustin
Carstens, advised me, was in his long experience the best way to stabilize the currency. Third, we
would signal the RBI could be bold and farsighted when the need arose – evidenced by the large
number of measures that were announced, and our ability to look beyond the currency turmoil to
discuss, for instance, the eventual internationalization of the rupee. Looking beyond the immediate
problems would also suggest we were not overly pre-occupied with the current volatility. Finally, I
wanted set standards for transparency and predictability, transparency through clear communication,
and predictability by laying out what we at the RBI intended to do, so that we could be held to it.
My initial statement, which I read out on national TV, is reproduced here almost in its entirety, with
only the description of some of the detailed measures dropped.
G
Statement on Taking Office, 4 September 2013
ood evening. I took charge this afternoon as the 23rd Governor of the
Reserve Bank of India. These are not easy times, and the economy faces
challenges. At the same time, India is a fundamentally sound economy with a
bright future. Our task today is to build a bridge to the future, over the stormy
waves produced by global financial markets. I have every confidence we will
succeed in doing that. Today I want to articulate some first steps, concrete
actions we will take, as well as some intentions to take actions based on plans we
will formulate.
Before I turn to specifics, let me repeat what I said on the day I was
appointed. The Reserve Bank is a great institution with a tradition of integrity,
independence, and professionalism. I congratulate Dr Subbarao on his leadership
in guiding the bank through very difficult times, and I look forward to working
with the many dedicated employees of the RBI to further some of the important
initiatives he started. I have been touched by the warmth with which the RBI
staff have welcomed me.
To the existing traditions of the RBI, which will be the bedrock of our work,
we will emphasize two other traditions that become important in these times:
transparency and predictability. At a time when financial market are volatile, and
there is some domestic political uncertainty because of impending elections, the
Reserve Bank of India should be a beacon of stability as to its objectives. That is
not to say we will never surprise markets with actions. A central bank should
never say ‘Never’! But the public should have a clear framework as to where we
are going, and understand how our policy actions fit into that framework. Key to
all this is communication, and I want to underscore communication with this
statement on my first day in office.
MONETARY POLICY
We will be making the first monetary policy statement of my term on 20
September. I have postponed the originally set date a bit so that between now
and then, I have enough time to consider all major developments in the required
detail. I will leave a detailed explanation of our policy stance till then, but let me
emphasize that the RBI takes its mandate from the RBI Act of 1934, which says
the Reserve Bank for India was constituted
‘to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary
stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its
advantage;’
The primary role of the central bank, as the Act suggests, is monetary stability,
that is, to sustain confidence in the value of the country’s money. Ultimately, this
means low and stable expectations of inflation, whether that inflation stems from
domestic sources or from changes in the value of the currency, from supply
constraints or demand pressures. I have asked Deputy Governor Urjit Patel,
together with a panel he will constitute of outside experts and RBI staff, to come
up with suggestions in three months on what needs to be done to revise and
strengthen our monetary policy framework. A number of past committees,
including the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee (FSLRC), have
opined on this, and their views will also be considered carefully.
INCLUSIVE DEVELOPMENT
I talked about the primary role of the RBI as preserving the purchasing power of
the rupee, but we have two other important mandates; inclusive growth and
development, as well as financial stability.
As the central bank of a developing country, we have additional tools to
generate growth – we can accelerate financial development and inclusion. Rural
areas, especially our villages, as well as small and medium industries across the
country, have been important engines of growth even as large company growth
has slowed. But access to finance is still hard for the poor, and for rural and
small and medium industries. We need faster, broad-based, inclusive growth
leading to a rapid fall in poverty.
The Indian public would benefit from more competition between banks, and
banks would benefit from more freedom in decision making. The RBI will
shortly issue the necessary circular to completely free bank branching for
domestic scheduled commercial banks in every part of the country. No longer
will a well-run scheduled domestic commercial bank have to approach the RBI
for permission to open a branch. We will, of course, require banks to fulfil
certain inclusion criteria in underserved areas in proportion to their expansion in
urban areas, and we will restrain improperly managed banks from expanding
until they convince supervisors of their stability. But branching will be free for
all scheduled domestic commercial banks except the poorly managed.
There has been a fair amount of public attention devoted to new bank
licences. The RBI will give out new bank licences as soon as consistent with the
highest standards of transparency and diligence. We are in the process of
constituting an external committee. Dr Bimal Jalan, an illustrious former
Governor, has agreed to chair it, and the committee will be composed of
individuals with impeccable reputations. This committee will screen licence
applicants after an initial compilation of applications by the RBI staff. The
external committee will make recommendations to the RBI Governor and
Deputy Governors, and we will propose the final slate to the Committee of the
RBI Central Board. I hope to announce the licences within, or soon after, the
term of Deputy Governor Anand Sinha, who has been shepherding the process.
His term expires in January 2014.
We will not stop with these licences. The RBI has put an excellent document
on its website exploring the possibility of differentiated licences for small banks
and wholesale banks, the possibility of continuous or ‘on-tap’ licensing, and the
possibility of converting large urban co-operative banks into commercial banks.
We will pursue these creative ideas of the RBI staff and come up with a detailed
roadmap of the necessary reforms and regulations for freeing entry and making
the licensing process more frequent after we get comments from stakeholders.
Finally, our banks have a number of obligations that pre-empt lending, and in
fact, allow what Dr Rakesh Mohan, an illustrious former Deputy Governor,
called ‘lazy banking’. One of the mandates for the RBI in the Act is to ensure the
flow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy. In this context, we need
to reduce the requirement for banks to invest in government securities in a
calibrated way, to what is strictly needed from a prudential perspective.
We also subject our banks to a variety of priority sector lending requirements.
I believe there is a role for such a mandate in a developing country – it is useful
to nudge banks into areas they would otherwise not venture into. But that
mandate should adjust to the needs of the economy, and should be executed in
the most efficient way possible. Let us remember that the goal is greater
financial access in all parts of the country, rather than meeting bureaucratic
norms. I am asking Dr Nachiket Mor to head a committee that will assess every
aspect of our approach to financial inclusion to suggest the way forward. In these
ways, we will further the development mission of the RBI.
RUPEE INTERNATIONALIZATION AND CAPITAL INFLOWS
This might be a strange time to talk about rupee internationalization, but we have
to think beyond the next few months. As our trade expands, we will push for
more settlement in rupees. This will also mean that we will have to open up our
financial markets more for those who receive rupees to invest them back in. We
intend to continue the path of steady liberalization.
The RBI wants to help our banks bring in safe money to fund our current
account deficit. The Reserve Bank of India has been receiving requests from
banks to consider a special concessional window for swapping Foreign Currency
Non-Resident (FCNR) deposits that will be mobilized following the recent
relaxations permitted by the bank. We will offer such a window to the banks to
swap the fresh FCNR dollar funds, mobilized for a minimum tenor of three years
and over, at a fixed rate of 3.5 per cent per annum for the tenor of the deposit.
Further, based again on requests received from banks, we have decided that
the current overseas borrowing limit of 50 per cent of the unimpaired Tier I
capital will be raised to 100 per cent and that the borrowings mobilized under
this provision can be swapped with the RBI at the option of the bank at a
concessional rate of 100 basis points below the ongoing swap rate prevailing in
the market.
The above schemes will be open up to 30 November 2013. The RBI reserves
the right to close the scheme earlier with due notice.
FINANCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Finance thrives when financial infrastructure is strong. The RBI has been
working hard to improve the financial infrastructure of the country – it has made
tremendous advances, for example, in strengthening the payment and settlement
systems in the country. Similarly, it has been working on improving information
sharing through agencies such as credit bureaus and rating agencies. I propose to
carry on such work, which will be extremely important to enhance the safety and
speed of flows as well as the quality and quantity of lending in the country.
On the retail side, I particularly want to emphasize the use of the unique
identity, Aadhaar, in building individual credit histories. This will be the
foundation of a revolution in retail credit.
For micro, small and medium firms (MSMEs), we intend to facilitate
Electronic Bill Factoring Exchanges, whereby MSME bills against large
companies can be accepted electronically and auctioned so that MSMEs are paid
promptly. This was a proposal in the report of my Committee on Financial
Sector reforms in 2008, and I intend to see it carried out.
Finance is not just about lending, it is about recovering loans also. We have
to improve the efficiency of the recovery system, especially at a time of
economic uncertainty like the present. Recovery should be focused on efficiency
and fairness – preserving the value of underlying valuable assets and jobs where
possible, even while redeploying unviable assets to new uses and compensating
employees fairly. All this should be done while ensuring that contractual
priorities are met. The system has to be tolerant of genuine difficulty while
coming down hard on mismanagement or fraud. Promoters do not have a divine
right to stay in charge regardless of how badly they mismanage an enterprise,
nor do they have the right to use the banking system to recapitalize their failed
ventures.
Most immediately, we need to accelerate the working of Debt Recovery
Tribunals and Asset Reconstruction Companies. Deputy Governor Anand Sinha
and I will be examining the necessary steps.
I have asked Deputy Governor Dr Chakrabarty to take a close look at rising
Non Performing Assets (NPAs) and the restructuring/recovery process, and we
too will be taking next steps shortly. RBI proposes to collect credit data and
examine large common exposures across banks. This will enable the creation of
a central repository on large credits, which we will share with the banks. This
will enable banks themselves to be aware of building leverage and common
exposures.
While the resumption of stalled projects and stronger growth will alleviate
some of the banking system difficulties, we will encourage banks to clean up
their balance sheets, and commit to a capital-raising programme where
necessary. The bad loan problem is not alarming yet, but it will only fester and
grow if left unaddressed.
We will also follow the FSLRC suggestion of setting up an enhanced
resolution structure for financial firms. The working group on resolution regimes
for financial institutions is looking at this and we will examine its
recommendations and take action soon after.
This is part of my short-term time table for the Reserve Bank. It involves
considerable change, and change is risky. But as India develops, not changing is
even riskier. We have to keep what is good about our system, of which there is a
tremendous amount, even while acting differently where warranted. The RBI has
always changed when needed, not following the latest fad, but doing what is
necessary. I intend to work with my excellent colleagues at the Reserve Bank,
the senior management of which is represented around this table, to achieve the
change we need.
Finally, a personal note: Any entrant to the central bank governorship
probably starts at the height of their popularity. Some of the actions I take will
not be popular. The governorship of the Central Bank is not meant to win one
votes or Facebook ‘likes’. But I hope to do the right thing, no matter what the
criticism, even while looking to learn from the criticism – Rudyard Kipling put it
better when he mused about the requirements of an ideal central banker in his
poem ‘If’:
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
But make allowance for their doubting too:
Kipling’s reference to ‘men’ only dates these lines, but his words are clear.
We will fill in details of what we have announced shortly, and lay out a
broader roadmap of reforms soon after. Appropriate notifications will be issued
shortly. As this is under way, we will turn to preparing the mid-quarter policy
statement.
II
My opening statement, which made headlines in the Indian papers the next day, had the desired effect
– a public, desperate for good news, started believing that the Reserve Bank could provide some. The
rupee stabilized as investors regained confidence.
While many elements of the package were important, one was particularly memorable because I
was initially against it. It had been presented to me when I was in the finance ministry in North Block.
Essentially, bankers told us they would bring plenty of dollars in as three-year foreign currency nonresident (FCNR) deposits, which they would convert to rupees and invest in India. In return, they
wanted a cheap rate at which they could convert rupees back into dollars three years hence. So long as
the Reserve Bank could be trusted to provide the forward dollars, this was a great deal for the banks –
they got rupee interest income and a guaranteed cheap price at which they could swap maturing rupees
back into dollars.
I did not think much of this scheme when I first heard of it, dismissing it as yet another clever ploy
by bankers to get a subsidy from a country in trouble. But it refused to go away, and my old colleagues
at the finance ministry thought it worth a try as the crisis of confidence worsened.
I too became more favourable after thinking carefully about it. First, I weighed the balance of risks.
If we did not move the rupee back to fundamental value, every one-rupee rise in the dollar-rupee rate
would costs us Rs 40,000 crores more in import costs. Assuming the rupee was undervalued by Rs 3
for a couple of years, this would mean a loss of lakhs of crores to national income. In contrast, even if
the scheme was wildly successful in attracting inflows, the payout would only be in the tens of
thousands of crores. Of course, there might be cheaper ways of restoring confidence but it was not
clear what they were. And time was of the essence.
Discussions with colleagues at the RBI had thrown up another rationale. The bankers who
proposed the scheme were saying that if the money came in, the rupee would appreciate, and it would
cost us less to offer the forward subsidy. This was self-serving and not quite right. What was right was
that if we changed the narrative on India, and the rupee continued appreciating between the point when
the money came in and the point we covered our liabilities to the bankers in forward markets, it would
cost us significantly less. In fact, we might even make money on the deal. But what if the rupee
plunged after the dollars flowed in? There were no certainties here.
The bottom line was that the scheme was a measured risk, with a probability that the RBI would
lose money, a certainty that the bankers would make money, but also a reasonable chance that the
country would be significantly better off. Policy making is about deciding in the face of uncertainty,
after weighing the alternatives as best as one can. Having obtained the concurrence of the finance
ministry, the RBI Governor had to decide. I chose to go ahead with it.
The FCNR scheme drew in $26 billion, more than any of us anticipated. But, equally important,
confidence picked up, the rupee continued strengthening beyond when the money came in, partly
because the global investor mood as well as Indian electoral projections also changed, and we covered
our forward swaps cheaply. The rupee became one of the most stable emerging market currencies for a
while.
Of course, in hindsight it seems like it was the obvious thing to do because it worked. The reality is
I
we will never know for certain whether it was the key! Perhaps it was the other elements of the
package such as the determination we expressed on controlling inflation, perhaps it was everything
together. Autobiographies are always written as if the author had it all mapped out with perfect
foresight, ignoring the risks and uncertainties at that time. This misleads, as much as those beautiful
photographs of a past holiday abstract from the heat, the mosquitoes, and the lack of connectivity.
Policy making invariably involves taking measured risks in the face of uncertainty, for one has neither
a prior template nor the luxury of indecision.
As an aside, that initial speech also had some unintended collateral effects. I became a ‘rock star’
central bank governor, the James Bond or Ranbir Kapoor of central banking, depending on which
paper you read – this was an image I tried hard to downplay because not only was it far from the
prosaic reality, but also I wanted the focus to be on the RBI’s innovative but reliable work. Perhaps the
article that did the most to ensure I would have a fan following was a send-up of the incoming
governor by the courageous though risqué columnist Shobhaa Dé. Years into my term, I finally met her
and her charming daughter at an official party, and I was delighted to find that she was as embarrassed
as I was about meeting in person after her piece. We had a good laugh about it. Kindling the press’s
interest unsheathed a double-edged sword, as we will see later, but it was by and large a helpful part of
my mission.
With the currency more stable, attention could now shift to other reforms. These reforms were
often discussed threadbare in the Senior Management Committee of the Reserve Bank, where groups
made presentations on proposed directions, and the entire senior staff consisting of the Governor,
Deputy Governors, and Executive Directors debated the issues. A variety of very useful ideas came up
in these discussions, which sometimes took on the character of a university seminar, with argument
and counter-argument. Unlike a university seminar, however, we needed decisions at the end of
meetings! The meetings were also a way to keep all our senior staff abreast of important developments,
and for them to have ownership of the reforms (both to the financial system and the RBI’s internal
functioning).
I got a chance to articulate our thinking on 15 November 2013 at the Bankcon Conference. I
stressed five pillars around which our reform efforts were structured. This then became an easy way to
explain our strategy to the many visitors we had, as well as to organize thinking within the RBI. In the
speeches and texts that are reproduced here, I have edited the original text only to eliminate repetition
or to improve clarity.
The Five Pillars of RBI’s Financial Sector Policies
want to focus on what we at the Reserve Bank are doing to improve the
financial system. We plan to build the Reserve Bank’s developmental
measures over the next few quarters on five pillars. These are:
1. Clarifying and strengthening the monetary policy framework.
2. Strengthening banking structure through new entry, branch expansion,
encouraging new varieties of banks, and moving foreign banks into better
regulated organizational forms.
3. Broadening and deepening financial markets and increasing their
liquidity and resilience so that they can help allocate and absorb the risks
entailed in financing India’s growth.
4. Expanding access to finance to small and medium enterprises, the
unorganized sector, the poor, and remote and underserved areas of the
country through technology, new business practices, and new
organizational structures; that is, financial inclusion.
5. Improving the system’s ability to deal with corporate distress and
financial institution distress by strengthening real and financial
restructuring as well as debt recovery.
Let me elaborate on each of these measures a little.
First, we are among the large countries with the highest consumer price
inflation in the world, even though growth is weaker than we would like it to be.
Much of the inflation is concentrated in food and services. Our households are
turning to gold because they find financial investments unattractive. At the same
time, many industrial corporations are complaining about high interest rates
because they cannot pass through their higher costs into higher prices for their
products.
We can spend a long time debating the sources of this inflation. But
ultimately, inflation comes from demand exceeding supply, and it can be
curtailed only by bringing both in balance. We need to reduce demand somewhat
without having serious adverse effects on investment and supply. This is a
balancing act, which requires the Reserve Bank to act firmly so that the economy
is disinflating, even while allowing the weak economy more time than one
would normally allow for it to reach a comfortable level of inflation. The weak
state of the economy, as well as the good kharif and rabi harvest, will generate
disinflationary forces that will help, and we await data to see how these forces
are playing out. No single data point or number will determine our next move.
I think the market understands what we are trying to do. But we do need a
more carefully spelled out monetary policy framework than we have currently.
Action on the framework will follow the submission of the Dr Urjit Patel
Committee report, which is expected by end-December 2013.
Second, we have already announced measures to free bank branching, and to
incentivize foreign banks to incorporate domestically. Going forward, we have to
give our public sector banks, which are a national asset, the means to improve
their competitiveness. Many of them have made enormous strides in the last
decade – for instance, the extent to which they have digitized their operations is
extremely praiseworthy – but because competition in the banking sector is likely
to increase in the next few years, they cannot rest on their laurels. In the coming
months, we will discuss with stakeholders in public sector banks about what
needs to be done to further improve their stability, efficiency and productivity.
Third, we need to enlist markets in the aid of banking. Liquid markets will
help banks offload risks they should not bear, such as interest rate or exchange
risk. They will also allow banks to sell assets that they have no comparative
advantage in holding, such as long-term loans to completed infrastructure
projects, which are better held by infrastructure funds, pension funds, and
insurance companies. Liquid markets will help promoters raise equity which is
sorely needed in the Indian economy to absorb the risks that banks otherwise end
up absorbing. Rather than seeing markets as being inimical to the development
of the banking sector, we have to see them as complementary – of course, this
requires you bankers to build on your risk management capabilities so that you
can use markets effectively.
In the coming weeks, we will roll out more recommendations of the Gandhi
Committee report to improve the liquidity and depth of the government
securities (G-Sec) market. We will then turn to money markets and corporate
debt markets. We will introduce new variants of interest rate futures and
products like inflation-indexed certificates, and work to improve liquidity in
derivative markets.
Fourth, we have to reach everyone, however remote or small, with financial
services. Financial inclusion does not just mean credit for productive purposes, it
means credit for health care emergencies or to pay lumpy school or college fees.
It means a safe means of remunerated savings, and an easy way to make
payments and remittances. It means insurance and pensions. It means financial
literacy and consumer protection.
We have made great strides in inclusion, but we are still some distance from
our goal. We have adopted a branch-based strategy for inclusion, but it is not
enough. Too many poor people in so-called ‘over-banked’ urban areas still do
not have access to banking services. We have many experiments under way to
use technology, mobile phones, new products such as mobile wallets, and new
entities such as business correspondents to link people up to the formal financial
system. Much as with cell phones where we created a frugal Indian model, we
need a frugal, trustworthy, and effective Indian model for financial inclusion.
The Dr Nachiket Mor Committee is helping us think through possible models,
and I am hopeful that when we outline measures based on its recommendations,
our fine banks, Non-Bank Finance Companies (NBFCs), information technology
companies and mobile players will rise to the occasion. At a more detailed level,
we have set up committees like the Sambamurthy Committee to advise us on
how to expand mobile banking in India through encrypted SMS-based funds
transfer in any type of handset.
I should emphasize the need for banks like the ones represented in this room
to move beyond simply opening bank accounts to ensuring that poor customers
are confident and comfortable enough to use them. Innovation in reaching out to
the underserved customer, rather than simply posting higher numbers in
branches or bank accounts opened, has to be part of our efforts.
And last but not least, we have to deal better with distress; The natural, and
worst, way for a bank management with limited tenure to deal with distress is to
‘extend and pretend’ – to evergreen the loan, hope it recovers by miracle, or that
one’s successor has to deal with it. The natural incentive for a promoter to deal
with distress is to hold on to equity and control despite having no real equity left,
and to stand in the way of all efforts to resolve the underlying project while
hoping for an ‘act of God’ to bail him out. Not all bankers and promoters
succumb to these natural incentives, but too many do.
We have to ensure that the system recognizes financial distress early, takes
steps to resolve it, and ensures fair recovery for lenders and investors. We could
wish for a more effective judicial process or a better bankruptcy system, but
while we await that, we have to improve the functioning of what we have. In the
next few weeks, we will announce measures to incentivize early recognition,
better resolution, and fair recovery of distressed loans. We will focus on putting
real assets back to work in their best use. Here again, you bankers have a critical
role to play by fighting the natural incentives that are built into the system. You
have to help those with genuine difficulty while being firm with those who are
trying to milk the system. The RBI will help you with every means at our
disposal.
Let me conclude. We are going through a period of great cynicism about
what India can do. That cynicism does not just permeate the foreign press and
their audiences, but also infects our domestic debate. Every policy is greeted
with suspicion and scrutinized for evidence of malfeasance. With no upside to
making decisions, it is no wonder that decision making has slowed. The solution,
however, cannot come through inaction but through action, action that is, and is
seen to be, purposeful, unbiased, and effective. No doubt mistakes will be made,
but if the weight of clean actions builds up, the miasma of suspicion that
pervades our society today will ebb. The Reserve Bank of India intends to play
its part in making this happen.
CHAPTER 2
HAWKS, DOVES, OR OWLS
I
My initial focus was, of course, on inflation. Whenever you want to embark on a set of actions in
public life in India, it helps to have a report recommending the actions. The report indicates that wise
people have thought deeply about the problem, and helps give the actions legitimacy. On monetary
policy, our go-to report was the Dr Urjit Patel Committee report, which I described in my opening
statement. My hope, which I shared with Dr Patel, was that we would get a roadmap much like the Dr
Sukhamoy Chakravarty report was for monetary policy in the 1980s, and I was not disappointed. My
task was now to figure out how to implement recommendations that could be implemented, and how to
modify what could not.
One important recommendation was seemingly innocuous and technical. We moved from targeting
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inflation, which was not what the consumer experienced, to targeting
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation, which was more closely related to the inflation in the basket of
goods they bought in their daily lives. This step was a fundamental change in monetary policy –
consumer price inflation had been much higher than wholesale price inflation for some time, which
meant that interest rates would have to go higher and stay higher for longer if we had to curb CPI
inflation. Would our industrialists, who had benefited from the era of cheap negative real interest rates,
understand that that era was over, and that the much abused saver would now get a better deal? Would
the industrialists protest?
Another important step was to embark on the road to targeting inflation. We set out on a glide path
to bring down inflation into the target range suggested by the Urjit Patel Committee Report, with clear
milestones every year. We met each milestone we had set for ourselves, even though many thought it
would be impossible. As we met milestones, we pressed for a formal inflation management agreement
with the government, in an attempt to institutionalize and make more credible the fight against
inflation. With the good offices of mandarins in the finance ministry, this agreement was signed.
We also modernized our liquidity operations, including how we conducted money market
operations, with the intent of deepening our money markets. Term repos and term reverse repos were
introduced, and eventually, we announced a move away from the practice of keeping the entire
banking system in liquidity deficit, which seemed to create unnecessary problems in the money
markets, to keeping it liquidity neutral.
Finally, together with the government, we designed the framework for an independent monetary
policy committee, which would take over the setting of policy from the Governor. A committee would
A
bring more minds to bear on policy setting, preserve continuity in case a member had to quit or retire,
and be less subject to political pressure, which was why I supported this move strongly. I was the last
Governor to set policy individually (albeit with full consultation with my colleagues). The Government
nominated its appointees to the monetary policy committee soon after I left office, and my successor
Dr Urjit Patel’s first policy was with the full monetary policy committee.
I set the parameters of our fight against inflation in a speech to the Fixed Income Money Market
and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) in February 2014. I sought to pinpoint the sources of
inflation, especially food inflation, and why bringing it under control was in the farmer’s interest. This
was an extremely important point to make to the then governing UPA regime, which had a
constituency that believed significantly higher food prices were in the farmers’ interest.
More generally, the way to fight inflation, given the inconclusive skirmishes we had had in the
recent past, was to signal that we were determined to bring it under control. But we also needed to do it
in a way that could be tolerated by the Indian economy, which has many people with minimal cushions
against adversity – I felt right from the beginning that doing a ‘Volcker’, that is, raising interest rates so
high that demand collapsed, was simply not right for the Indian economy. However, I was sure that the
heavily indebted interests would soon gather to oppose the RBI’s agenda, and that any government’s
tolerance for tight monetary policy would wane. So we had to show results quickly. My speeches on
inflation tried to explain our stance to the general public, even while trying to build public support in
an environment that was sceptical that the RBI could control inflation.
Fighting Inflation
s you know, the Reserve Bank of India was constituted ‘to regulate the issue
of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary
stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the
country to its advantage’. Implicit in these words are the core purposes of the
RBI: to foster monetary and financial stability conducive to sustainable
economic growth, and to ensure the development of an efficient and inclusive
financial system.
Note that the RBI is committed to getting the strongest growth possible for
India – there is no difference between us and the finance ministry on this. We
believe the best way we can foster sustainable growth in the current situation,
other than through developing the financial sector, is through monetary stability
– by bringing down inflation over a reasonable period of time. More specifically,
we intend to bring CPI inflation down to 8 per cent by January 2015 and 6 per
cent by January 2016.
There are a number of points here that need elaborating. First, are we
choosing to tackle inflation at the expense of growth? Most people believe there
is a short-run trade-off between growth and inflation. By raising interest rates,
the RBI causes banks to raise rates and thus lowers demand; firms do not borrow
as much to invest when rates are higher and individuals stop buying durable
goods against credit and, instead, turn to save. Lower demand growth leads to a
better match between demand and supply, and thus lower inflation for the goods
being produced.
Relatedly, if lower rates generate higher demand and higher prices for goods,
people may produce more of those goods, believing that they are getting more
revenues. But because all goods are going up in price, high inflation reduces
what they can buy out of the revenues. Following the saying, ‘You can fool all
the people some of the time’, bursts of inflation can generate growth for some
time. Thus, in the short run, the argument goes, higher inflation leads to higher
growth.
But as the public gets used to the higher level of inflation, the only way to
fool the public again is to generate yet higher inflation. The result is an
inflationary spiral which creates tremendous costs for the public. Therefore,
economists have argued – and a number of Nobel prizes have been given for the
ideas contained in the previous paragraphs – that the best way for the central
bank to generate growth in the long run is for it to keep inflation low and steady.
And if the public starts expecting that inflation will stay low, the central bank
can cut interest rates significantly, thus encouraging demand and growth. Indeed,
the reason the Malaysian Central Bank can keep rates low today to foster growth
is because it has fought the battle against inflation and convinced its citizens
that, if need be, it will smote the inflationary beast again if it rears its head.
Put differently, in order to generate sustainable growth, we have to fight
inflation first. Let me also add that greater public faith that inflation will be low
will add stability to our currency, and prevent the kind of gyrations we saw last
summer. Exchange rate stability is central to business interests.
If we have to bring down inflation, we have to start today. We cannot wait till
the public’s expectations of higher inflation get more entrenched, and the
inflationary spiral gains momentum. This is why we have raised interest rates
three times since September.
But what about industrialists who tell us to cut rates? I have yet to meet an
industrialist who does not want lower rates, whatever the level of rates. But will
a lower policy interest rate today give him more incentive to invest? We at the
RBI think not. First, we don’t believe the primary factor holding back
investment today is high interest rates. Second, even if we cut policy rates, we
don’t believe banks, who are paying higher deposit rates, will cut their lending
rates. The reason is that the depositor, given her high inflationary expectations,
will not settle for less than the rates banks are paying her. Inflation is placing a
floor on deposit rates, and thus on lending rates.
Currently, therefore, we do not believe the policy rate is at a level where it
can affect demand significantly, one way or the other. We do believe, however,
that as inflation comes down because of the weak economy and strong food
production, the policy rate will become a stronger influence on bank interest rate
setting, and will start influencing demand.
A more important source of our influence today, however, is expectations. If
people believe we are serious about inflation, and their expectations of inflation
start coming down, inflation will also come down. Of course, many people form
expectations simply by extrapolating the most recent or most salient experience
they have. So we also need to take advantage of the current episode of food price
disinflation to bring down expectations – yet another reason for acting now.
Let us turn from answering those who want us to go slow to those who want
us to do more. If we think inflation is so important, why don’t we ‘do a Volcker’
and try and bring down inflation quickly by raising rates sky high? Of course, if
we do raise policy rates substantially, banks will also have to raise rates to match
us. While this may lead to a collapse in demand and bring inflation down
quickly, it will cause significant damage to the economy – remember the severe
recession Volcker’s Fed brought about and the Savings and Loan Crisis that
followed?
A developing country is not in the same resilient position as the United
States. Rather than administer shock therapy to a weak economy, the RBI prefers
to dis-inflate over time rather than abruptly, while being prepared to do what is
necessary if the economy deviates from the projected inflation path. As of now,
we believe the rate is appropriately set.
Then there are those who believe we are moving too independently. All we
have done thus far is to adopt the reasonable suggestion of the Patel Committee
that we focus on CPI inflation rather than WPI inflation as our primary
objective. The Patel Committee has also suggested a time horizon to glide down
to 6 per cent inflation that seems doable without extreme hardship. If the
eventual decision of the government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, is to
adopt the recommendations of the Mistry Committee, the Committee on
Financial Sector Reforms, the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee
(FSLRC) and the Patel Committee, and focus on some form of an inflation
objective, it would be good for the medium-term inflation target to be set by the
executive or legislature, advised by the Reserve Bank.
The Patel Committee report is out there for public comment and debate, and
once we collect and analyse comments, we will take an internal view and then
start deliberations with the government. All this said, international experience
suggests that, ideally, once the central bank’s objective is given, and the
operational target fixed, the government should leave the technocrats in the
central bank to do their job.
Finally, does the Patel Committee intend to turn the RBI into inflation
‘nutters’ focused on bringing down inflation to the exclusion of all else,
including financial stability? Of course not! Medium-term flexible inflation
targeting means that the monetary policy committee focuses on inflation over the
medium term, being concerned about too high, as well as too low, inflation.
That means it may be willing to overlook temporary inflation spikes (such as
this November’s inflation numbers) but also raise rates when sustained low
interest rates and low inflation increase threats to financial stability – because a
financial crisis could lead to deflation. In other words, the monetary policy
committee will not put on blinkers and see just the inflation number. A number
of emerging markets have adopted some form of targeting, while ‘non-targeters’
like the Federal Reserve target inflation in all but name, including putting a
number to its goal of price stability.
In the remaining time, I want to present one more issue that has many
commentators exercised – they say the real problem is food inflation, how do
you expect to bring it down through the policy rate? The simple answer to such
critics is that core CPI inflation, which excludes food and energy, has also been
very high, reflecting the high inflation in services. Bringing that down is
centrally within the RBI’s ambit. But I will argue that monetary policy is not
irrelevant even in controlling food inflation, though clearly, the government also
has an important role to play.
1. ROLE OF FOOD PRICES IN THE HIGH INFLATION EXPERIENCE OF RECENT YEARS
Headline inflation measured by the new CPI has remained in double digits
during April 2012 to January 2014, averaging 10 per cent over this period. Food
inflation, which has a weight of 47.6 per cent in the index, has contributed the
largest share of headline inflation. Food inflation itself has stayed in double
digits throughout this period, edging down to 9.9 per cent only in January 2014.
2. WHY ARE FOOD PRICES HIGH?
Although domestic production has increased steadily, barring reversals in 2009-
10 and 2012-13, this has not been reflected in a softening of food prices. Let us
try and understand why.
GROWING PROSPERITY AND DIETARY SHIFTS
Data on household consumption expenditure show that the share of food in
overall consumption has been declining during the last decade, but at a milder
pace than the significant relative increase in food prices. This suggests that
demand is relatively less elastic to price changes. Despite the decline in overall
consumption share, per capita food consumption in real terms has increased,
particularly in rural areas. There has also been a distinct shift in dietary patterns
towards protein-rich items and other high value foods. These items, in turn, have
been contributing significantly to overall food price increases in the recent
period.
OTHER POSSIBLE CAUSES OF HIGH FOOD PRICE INFLATION
A. MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE
One obvious cause for higher food price inflation that analysts have pointed to is
higher minimum support prices (MSP). The minimum support price is set by the
government on the recommendations of the Commission on Agricultural Costs
and Prices (CACP), based on a variety of factors including primarily the cost of
production and price trends in the market (domestic and international). The crops
covered under MSP scheme constitute more than a third of the category ‘primary
articles’ in the WPI. Since minimum support prices are intended to be a floor for
market prices, and have sometimes directly set the market price when increases
have been substantial, for key crops the rate of price inflation seems to relate to
the increase in MSP in recent years.
Another way of saying this is that there has been a shift in the relative price
of agricultural commodities, engineered by the rise in MSPs. If the idea is to get
more food production to meet the rising demand we documented, this seems to
be just what is needed. If we plot the ratio of WPI of food to WPI of non-food
items over time, it suggests an appreciable improvement in terms of trade for
agriculture.
But when we look at the ratio of changes in input cost over the changes in the
output price of agricultural commodities received on the basis of CACP data, it
has remained flat, indicating that the gains from MSP increases have not accrued
to the farm sector in full measure because the costs of inputs have been rising.
This may indicate why production growth has not been stronger. What could
explain this?
One explanation could be that MSPs also drive input costs, so increasing
MSPs is like a dog chasing its tail – it can never catch it. Another could be that
since rice and wheat are the primary food commodities procured at the MSP,
production is distorted towards rice and wheat, leading to a sub-optimal
production mix by farmers – too much rice and wheat, and too little of other
needed commodities. Both these explanations would suggest the need for more
moderation as the government sets the MSPs in coming months.
It is useful, though, to look at the details of the cost increases. Prices of
agricultural inputs, including wages, have recorded a sharp increase during
2008-09 through 2012-13 in comparison with the preceding five years (2004-05
to 2007-08). Perhaps the most significant increase has been in rural wages.
Nominal rural wages have grown at a sharp pace during the last five years.
Because so many Indian workers are at subsistence wages, higher food prices do
drive rural wages higher, and there is some evidence for this before 2007. From
2007 onwards, however, econometric tests suggest causality has flowed from
wages to prices, underscoring the role of rural wages as a major determinant in
food price increases. So why has rural wage growth been so strong?
B. MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT (MGNREGA)
A sharp pickup in rural wages was seen after the rural employment guarantee
programme (assuring 100 days of employment to every household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work) was enacted. MGNREGA may
have contributed to the bargaining power of rural workers, but careful
econometric studies suggest that it accounts for only a small fraction of the rural
wage increase, and indeed, any effect is waning. That said, the indexation of
MGNREGA wages suggests its effects in pushing rural wage inflation will not
disappear entirely.
C. RURAL LIQUIDITY AND CREDIT
There has been an increase in liquidity flowing to the agricultural sector, both
from land sales, as well as from a rise in agricultural credit. More availability of
funds to the farmer has fostered substantial private investment in agriculture, but
may also have pushed up rural wages.
D. LABOUR SHIFTING TO CONSTRUCTION
The labour force has been moving from agriculture to non-agriculture sectors,
particularly construction. This would have the effect of pulling up rural
labourers’ wages (due to scarcity), especially in the labour supplying states. Total
agricultural labour declined from 259 million in 2004-05 to 231 million in 2012-
12. Agriculture, which accounted for 60 per cent of total employment in 1999-
2000, now accounts for less than 50 per cent.
E. FEMALE PARTICIPATION
One of the more interesting possible explanations for the rise in rural wages is
the changing female participation in rural markets. The female participation rate
is down in all the age categories. Improved living standards could lead rural
families to withdraw women from the labour force. Also, higher prosperity could
lead to greater investment in educating girls (for the age group 10 to 24) again
leading to lower participation in the workforce.
3. TO SUMMARIZE
In sum then, when we examine food inflation, a substantial portion stems from
an increase in food production costs, primarily rural wage inflation. Some of that
is an increase in real wages, needed to attract labour to agriculture, away from
construction, education, household work, or MGNREGA.
If, however, wages elsewhere also go up, the necessary shift in relative wages
to keep agricultural work attractive will not take place, and we will continue to
have a wage spiral. Also, some of the agricultural wage growth may be because
of more liquidity flowing into rural areas. Somewhat paradoxically, to contain
food inflation and get a strong increase in food production, we need to
(i) Contain the rise in wages elsewhere so that relative wages in
agriculture can rise without too much overall increase in wages.
(ii) Contain any unwarranted rise in rural wages as well as the rise in other
agricultural input costs (though not through subsidies) so that the
farmer gets a higher return.
(iii) Allow food prices to be determined by the market and use minimum
support prices to provide only a lower level of support so that
production decisions do not get distorted or the price wage spiral
accentuated. This means limiting the pace of MSP increases going
forward.
(iv) Reduce the wedge between what the farmer gets and what is paid by
the household by reducing the role, number, and monopoly power of
middlemen (amend Agricultural Produce Market Committee – APMC
– Acts), as well as by improving logistics.
(v) Improve farm productivity through technology extension, irrigation,
etc.
Note that of these steps, monetary policy has a direct role in (i) and (ii) by
slowing the demand for labour as well as anchoring inflation expectations, and
thereby moderating wage bargaining. Indeed, with the slowdown in the urban
economy, there is some evidence now that rural wage growth is slowing.
Finally, our food prices have largely caught up with global prices. Given that
global food prices have been moderating, such moderation should feed through
to domestic food prices – provided we do not intervene to prevent the feedthrough of global prices, and do not intervene in limiting exports or imports.
Let me emphasize that the RBI welcomes rural prosperity and wants to help
increase rural productivity through appropriate credit and investment. But recent
inflation has not helped strengthen the hand of the farmer, so the fight against
inflation is also in the farmer’s interest.
To sum up,
As prosperity has increased the demand for food, we have needed more
food production (or imports).
Higher agricultural commodity prices should have incentivized farmers
to produce significantly more.
They have, but not enough. Part of the reason may be that farmer
earnings are being eaten away by higher costs, most important of which
is wages.
To limit the rise in rural wages, given that it has to rise relative to other
wages to attract labour into agriculture, wages elsewhere should not rise
as much.
Monetary policy is an appropriate tool with which to limit the rise in
wages, especially urban ones.
The slowdown in rural wage growth may be partly the consequence of
tighter policy limiting wage rise elsewhere.
Of course, monetary policy’s effectiveness in containing other price and
wage increases (such as services prices, which are an important part of
the CPI index) is far less controversial.
The RBI believes its fight against inflation will have traction, despite food being
an important component of the CPI.
I
II
As I talked to people around the country, I discovered that as inflation came down and banks lowered
deposit rates, savers were unhappy – even though inflation had fallen much more than the rates on
deposits. Earlier, they argued, they got paid 10 per cent on their fixed deposits at banks, now they got 8
per cent. Was that fair? I had to explain that it was indeed, because inflation had come down faster, so
the real returns (in terms of goods and services they could purchase) on their savings were now higher.
To illustrate the point, I gave way to my inner teacher in the C.D. Deshmukh Lecture delivered at the
NCAER in January 2016. The press soon termed this ‘Dosanomics’, though it was really just an
example.
Dosanomics
ndustrialists grumble about high rates while retirees complain about the low
rates they get today on deposits. Both overstate their case, though, as I have
said repeatedly, the way to resolve their differences is to bring CPI inflation
steadily down.
The typical letter I get (from the retiree) goes, ‘I used to get 10 per cent
earlier on a one-year fixed deposit, now I barely get 8 per cent’, please tell banks
to pay me more else I won’t be able to make ends meet’. The truth is that the
retiree is getting more today but he does not realize it, because he is focusing
only on the nominal interest he gets and not on the underlying inflation which
has come down even more sharply, from about 10 per cent to 5.5 per cent.
To see this, let us indulge in Dosa economics. Say the pensioner wants to buy
dosas and at the beginning of the period, they cost Rs 50 per dosa. Let us say he
has savings of Rs 1,00,000. He could buy 2,000 dosas with the money today, but
he wants more by investing.
At 10 per cent interest, he gets Rs 10,000 after one year plus his principal.
With dosas having gone up by 10 per cent in price to Rs 55, he can buy 182
dosas approximately with the Rs 10,000 interest.
Now what happens when inflation comes down? At 8 per cent interest, he
gets Rs 8,000 in interest. With dosas having gone up by 5.5 per cent in price,
each dosa costs Rs 52.75, so he can now buy only 152 dosas approximately with
the interest payment. So the pensioner seems right to complain: with lower
interest payments, he can now buy less.
But wait a minute. Remember, he gets his principal back also and that too has
to be adjusted for inflation. In the high inflation period, it was worth 1,818
dosas, in the low inflation period, it is worth 1,896 dosas. So in the high inflation
period, principal plus interest are worth 2,000 dosas together, while in the low
inflation period it is worth 2,048 dosas. He is about 2.5 per cent better off saving
in the low inflation period in terms of dosas.
This is a long-winded way of saying that inflation is the silent killer because
it eats into pensioners’ principal, even while they are deluded by high nominal
interest rates into thinking they are getting an adequate return. Indeed, with 10
per cent return and 10 per cent inflation, the deposit is not giving you any real
return net of inflation, which is why you can buy only 2,000 dosas after a year of
saving, the same as you could buy immediately today. In contrast, when inflation
is 5.5 per cent but the interest rate you are getting is 8 per cent, you are earning a
real rate of 2.5 per cent, which means 2.5 per cent more dosas, as we have seen.
So while I sympathize with pensioners, they certainly are better off today than in
the past.
I
III
CPI inflation was 4.39 per cent in September 2016 when I ended my term, down from 10.5 per cent in
September 2013 in the beginning of my term.* We were well on our way to meeting the third signpost
on our glide path, 5 per cent inflation by March 2017 (which was indeed achieved by my successor).
As I ended my tenure, I thought it was very important to communicate once again the reasons why we
fought inflation, and why the battle could never be fully over, and why the fight needed to continue. I
wanted to explain why the fight was important for sustainable growth, and why we had
institutionalized the fight through a monetary policy framework agreed with the government, and an
independent monetary policy committee appointed largely by the government. This was in a speech
delivered at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) on 20 June 2016.
The Fight against Inflation: A Measure of Our
Institutional Development
n my speech today, I thought I would describe our efforts to build a different
kind of institution, not one that delves into the deepest realms of outer space or
into the tiniest constituents of an atom, but one that attempts to control
something that affects your daily life; inflation. There are parallels between the
institution building you have done at TIFR, and what we are setting up to control
inflation, though clearly our efforts are much less tied to investigating the very
fabric of the universe and more towards influencing human behaviour.
Ultimately, both require a fundamental change in mindset.
THE COSTS OF INFLATION
High inflation has been with us in India for the last four decades. Most recently,
we have experienced an average of more than 9 per cent inflation between 2006
and 2013.
What are the costs of having high inflation? Clearly, everyone understands
the costs of hyperinflation, when prices are rising every minute. Money is then a
hot potato that no one wants to hold, with people rushing straight from the bank
to the shops to buy goods in case their money loses value along the way. As
people lose faith in money, barter of goods for goods or services becomes the
norm, making transacting significantly more difficult. For instance, how much of
a physics lecture would you have to pay a taxi driver to drive you to Bandra;
moreover would the taxi driver accept a physics lecture in payment?; perhaps
you would have to lecture a student, and get the student to sing to the taxi
driver…you get the point, transacting becomes difficult as hyperinflation renders
money worthless.
Hyperinflation also has redistributive effects, destroying the middle class’s
savings held in bonds and deposits. The horrors of hyperinflation in Austria and
Germany in the 1920s still make scary reading.
So, clearly, no one wants hyperinflation. But what if inflation were only 15
per cent per year? Haven’t countries grown fast over a period of time despite
high inflation? The answer is yes, but perhaps they could have grown faster with
low inflation. After all, the variability of inflation increases with its level, as
does the dispersion of prices from their fundamental value in the economy. This
makes price signals more confusing – is the price of my widget going up because
of high demand or because of high generalized inflation? In the former case, I
can sell more if I produce more, in the latter case I will be left with unsold
inventory. Production and investment therefore become more risky.
Moreover, high and variable inflation causes lenders to demand a higher
fixed interest rate to compensate for the risk that inflation will move around (the
so-called inflation risk premium), thus raising the cost of finance. The long-term
nominal (and real) interest rates savers require rise, thus making some longduration projects prohibitively costly.
These effects kick in only when inflation is noticeably high. So it is
legitimate to ask, ‘At what threshold level of inflation does it start hurting
growth?’ Unfortunately, this question is hard to answer – developing countries
typically have higher inflation, and developing countries also have higher
growth. So one might well find a positive correlation between inflation and
growth, though this does not mean more inflation causes more growth. For this
reason, the literature on estimating threshold effects beyond which inflation hurts
growth is both vast as well as inconclusive. Most studies find that double-digit
inflation is harmful for growth but are fuzzier about where in the single digits the
precise threshold lies.
THE INFLATION TARGET
Nevertheless, given the limited evidence, why do most countries set their
inflation target in the low single digits – 2 to 5 per cent rather than 7 to 10 per
cent? Three reasons come to mind. First, even if inflation is at a moderate level
that does not hurt overall growth, the consequences of inflation are not evenly
distributed. While higher inflation might help a rich, highly indebted,
industrialist because his debt comes down relative to sales revenues, it hurts the
poor daily wage worker, whose wage is not indexed to inflation. Second, higher
inflation is more variable. This raises the chance of breaching any given range
around the target if it is set at a higher level. To the extent that a higher target is
closer to the threshold where the consequences on growth are adverse, this
makes it more likely the country will exceed the threshold and experience lower
growth. Third, inflation could feed on itself at higher levels – the higher the
target, the more chances of entering regions where inflation spirals upwards.
The received wisdom in monetary economics today is therefore that a central
bank serves the economy and the cause of growth best by keeping inflation low
and stable around the target it is given by the government. This contrasts with
the earlier prevailing view in economics that by pumping up demand through
dramatic interest rate cuts, the central bank could generate sustained growth,
albeit with some inflation. That view proved hopelessly optimistic about the
powers of the central bank.
Put differently, when people say ‘Inflation is low, you can now turn to
stimulating growth’, they really do not understand that these are two sides of the
same coin. The RBI always sets the policy rate as low as it can, consistent with
meeting its inflation objective. Indeed, the fact that inflation is fairly close to the
upper bound of our target zone today suggests we have not been overly hawkish,
and were wise to disregard advice in the past to cut more deeply. If a critic
believes interest rates are excessively high, he either has to argue the
government-set inflation target should be higher than it is today, or that the RBI
is excessively pessimistic about the path of future inflation. He cannot have it
both ways, want lower inflation as well as lower policy rates.
At the same time, the RBI does not focus on inflation to the exclusion of
growth. If inflation rises sharply, for instance, because of a sharp rise in the price
of oil, it would not be sensible for a central bank to bring inflation within its
target band immediately by raising interest rates so high as to kill all economic
activity. Instead, it makes sense to bring inflation back under control over the
medium term, that is, the next two years or so, by raising rates steadily to the
point where the bank thinks it would be enough to bring inflation back within the
target range. Let me emphasize that this is not a prediction of either the path of
oil prices or a forecast of our monetary actions, lest I read in the paper tomorrow
‘RBI to raise rates’. More generally, the extended glide path over which we are
bringing inflation in check appropriately balances inflation and the need for
reasonable growth.
ARGUMENTS AGAINST WHAT WE ARE DOING
There are many who believe we are totally misguided in our actions. Let me
focus on four criticisms. First, we focus on the wrong index of inflation. Second,
we have killed private investment by keeping rates too high. Somewhat
contradictorily, we are also hurting the pensioner by cutting rates too sharply.
Third, monetary policy has no effects on inflation when the economy is supply
constrained, so we should abandon our attempt to control it. Fourth, the central
bank has little control over inflation when government spending dominates
(what in the jargon is called ‘fiscal dominance’).
THE WRONG INDEX
Historically, the RBI targeted a variety of indicators, putting a lot of weight on
the Wholesale Price Inflation (WPI). Theoretically, reliance on WPI has two
problems. First, what the common citizen experiences is retail inflation, that is,
Consumer Price Inflation (CPI). Since monetary policy ‘works’ by containing
the public’s inflation expectations and thus wage demands, Consumer Price
Inflation is what matters. Second, WPI contains a lot of traded manufactured
goods and commodity inputs in the basket, whose price is determined
internationally. A low WPI could result from low international inflation, while
domestic components of inflation such as education and health care services as
well as retail margins and non-traded food are inflating merrily to push up CPI.
By focusing on WPI, we could be deluded into thinking we control inflation,
even though it stems largely from the actions of central banks elsewhere. In
doing so we neglect CPI, which is what matters to our common man, and is
more the consequence of domestic monetary policy.
THE EFFECTIVE REAL INTEREST RATE, INVESTMENTS, AND SAVINGS
Of course, one reason critics may advocate a focus on WPI is because it is low
today, and thus would mean low policy rates. This is short-sighted reasoning for
when commodity prices and global inflation picks up, WPI could well exceed
CPI [Author’s note: This, in fact, was the case at the time this book was put
together]. There is, however, a more subtle argument; the real interest rate is the
difference between the interest rate a borrower pays and inflation – it is the true
cost of borrowing in terms of goods like widgets or dosas. If policy interest rates
are set to control CPI, they may be too high for manufacturers who see their
product prices appreciating only at the WPI rate. I am sympathetic to the
argument, but I also think the concern is overblown. Even if manufacturers do
not have much pricing power because of global competition, their commodity
suppliers have even less. So a metal producer benefits from the fall in coal and
ore prices, even though they may not get as high a realization on metal sales as
in the past. The true measure of inflation for them is the inflation in their profits,
which is likely significantly greater than suggested by WPI.
A second error that is made is to attribute all components of the interest rate
paid by the borrower to monetary policy. For heavily indebted borrowers,
however, a large component of the interest rate they pay is the credit risk
premium banks charge for the risk that they may not get repaid. This credit risk
premium is largely independent of where the RBI sets its policy rate.
So when someone berates us because heavily indebted industrialists borrow
at 14 per cent interest with WPI at 0.5 per cent, they make two important errors
in saying the real interest rate is 13.5 per cent. First, 7.5 per cent is the credit
spread banks charge for the risk of default, and would not be significantly lower
if we cut the policy rate (at 6.5 per cent today) by another 100 basis points.
Second, the inflation that matters to the industrialist is not the 0.5 per cent at
which their output prices are inflating, but the 4 per cent at which their profits
are inflating (because costs are falling at 5 per cent annually). The real risk-free
interest rate they experience is 2.5 per cent, a little higher than elsewhere in the
world, but not the most significant factor standing in the way of investment. It
would be far more effective for borrowers to bring down their rates by
improving their repayment behaviour and thus bringing down the credit risk
premium than to try and push the RBI to lower rates unduly.
The policy rate in effect plays a balancing act. As important as real
borrowing rates are for the manufacturer, real deposit rates are for the saver. In
the last decade, savers have experienced negative real rates over extended
periods as the CPI has exceeded deposit interest rates. This means that whatever
interest they get has been more than wiped out by the erosion in their principal’s
purchasing power due to inflation. Savers intuitively understand this, and had
been shifting to investing in real assets like gold and real estate, and away from
financial assets like deposits. This meant that India needed to borrow from
abroad to fund investment, which led to a growing unsustainable current account
deficit.
In recent years, as we fought against inflation, we cut the policy rate only
when we thought depositors could expect a reasonable positive real return on
their financial savings. This has helped increase household financial savings
relative to their savings in real assets, and helped bring down the current account
deficit. At the same time, I do get a lot of heart-rending letters from pensioners
complaining about the cut in deposit rates. The truth is they are better off now
than in the past, as I tried to explain in a previous lecture, but I can understand
why they are upset when they see their interest income diminishing.
The bottom line is that in controlling inflation, monetary policy makers
effectively end up balancing the interests of both investors and savers over the
business cycle. At one of my talks, an industrialist clamoured for a 4 per cent
rate on his borrowing. When I asked him if he would deposit at that rate in a safe
bank, leave alone invest in one of his risky friends, he said ‘No!’ Nevertheless,
he insisted on our cutting rates significantly. Unfortunately, policy makers do not
have the luxury of inconsistency.
SUPPLY CONSTRAINTS
Food inflation has contributed significantly to CPI inflation, but so has inflation
in services like education and health care. Some argue, rightly, that it is hard for
the RBI to directly control food demand through monetary policy. Then they
proceed, incorrectly, to say we should not bother about controlling CPI inflation.
The reality is that while it is hard for us to control food demand, especially of
essential foods, and only the government can influence food supply through
effective management, we can control demand for other, more discretionary,
items in the consumption basket through tighter monetary policy. To prevent
sustained food inflation from becoming generalized inflation through higher
wage increases, we have to reduce inflation in other items. Indeed, overall
headline inflation may have stayed below 6 per cent recently even in periods of
high food inflation, precisely because other components of the CPI basket such
as ‘clothing and footwear’ are inflating more slowly.
FISCAL DOMINANCE
Finally, one reason the RBI was historically reluctant to lock itself into an
inflation-focused framework is because it feared government overspending
would make its task impossible. The possibility of fiscal dominance, however,
only means that given the inflation objective set by the government, both the
government and the RBI have a role to play. If the government overspends, the
central bank has to compensate with tighter policy to achieve the inflation
objective. So long as this is commonly understood, an inflation-focused
framework means better coordination between the government and the central
bank as they go towards the common goal of macro stability. I certainly believe
that the responsible recent budget did create room for the RBI to ease in April.
PRAGMATIC INFLATION FOCUS
As you will understand from all that I have been saying, monetary policy under
an inflation-focused framework tries to balance various interests as we bring
inflation under control. In doing so, we have to have a pragmatic rather than
doctrinaire mindset. For example, emerging markets can experience significant
capital inflows that can affect exchange rate volatility as well as financial
stability. A doctrinaire mindset would adopt a hands-off approach, while the
pragmatic mindset would permit intervention to reduce volatility and instability.
Nevertheless, the pragmatic mind would also recognize that the best way to
obtain exchange rate stability is to bring inflation down to a level commensurate
with global inflation.
Similarly, while financial stability considerations are not explicitly in the
RBI’s objectives, they make their way in because the RBI has to keep growth in
mind while controlling inflation. So if the RBI’s monetary policies are
contributing to a credit or asset price bubble that could lead to a systemic
meltdown and growth collapse, the RBI will have to resort to corrective
monetary policy if macro-prudential policy alternatives are likely to prove
ineffective.
THE TRANSITION TO LOW INFLATION
The period when a high inflation economy moves to low inflation is never an
easy one. After years of high inflation, the public’s expectations of inflation have
been slow to adjust downwards. As a result, they have been less willing to adjust
their interest expectations downwards. Household financial savings are
increasing rapidly as a fraction of overall household savings, but not yet
significantly as a fraction of GDP. Some frictions in the interest rate-setting
market do not also help. Even while policy rates are down, the rates paid by the
government on small savings are significantly higher than bank deposit rates, as
are the effective rates on tax free bonds. I am glad the government has decided to
link the rates on small savings to government bond rates, but these rates will
continuously have to be examined to ensure they do not form a high floor below
which banks cannot cut deposit rates. All in all, bank lending rates have moved
down, but not commensurate with policy rate cuts.
The wrong thing to do at such times is to change course. As soon as
economic policy becomes painful, clever economists always suggest new
unorthodox, painless pathways. This is not a problem specific to emerging
markets, but becomes especially acute since every emerging market thinks it is
unique, and the laws of economics operate differently here. Flipping through a
book of cartoons by that great economist, R.K. Laxman, I found one that
indicated the solution for every ill in 1997, when the cartoon was published, as
now, is for the RBI to cut interest rates by a hundred basis points. Arguments
change, but clever solutions do not.
Decades of studying macroeconomic policy tells me to be very wary of
economists who say you can have it all if only you try something out of the box.
Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela tried unorthodox policies with depressingly
orthodox consequences. Rather than experiment with macro-policy, which brings
macro risks that our unprotected poor can ill afford, better to be unorthodox on
microeconomic policy such as those that define the business and banking
environment. Not only do we have less chance of doing damage if we go wrong,
but innovative policy may open new paths around old bottlenecks. Specifically,
on its part the RBI has been adopting more liberal attitudes towards bank
licensing, towards financial inclusion, and towards payment technologies and
institutions in order to foster growth.
INSTITUTION BUILDING
Let me return to institution building. We had gotten used to decades of moderate
to high inflation, with industrialists and governments paying negative real
interest rates and the burden of the hidden inflation tax falling on the middleclass saver and the poor. What is happening today is truly revolutionary – we are
abandoning the ways of the past that benefited the few at the expense of the
many. As we move towards embedding institutions that result in sustained low
inflation and positive real interest rates, this requires all constituencies to make
adjustments. For example, if industrialists want significantly lower rates, they
have to support efforts to improve loan recovery so that banks and bond markets
feel comfortable with low credit spreads. The central and state governments have
to continue on the path of fiscal consolidation so that they borrow less and thus
spend less on interest payments. Households will have to adjust to receiving
lower nominal rates on deposits, but must recognize that they are also receiving
higher real rates which gives their savings higher purchasing power. They will
find it worthwhile to save more to finance the enormous investment needs of the
country.
Adjustment is difficult and painful in the short run. We must not get diverted
as we build the institutions necessary to secure a low inflation future, especially
because we seem to be making headway. The government has taken the
momentous step of both setting a CPI-based inflation objective for the RBI as
well as a framework for setting up an independent monetary policy committee.
In the days ahead, a new Governor, as well as the members of the committee,
will be picked. I am sure they will internalize the frameworks and institutions
that have been set up, and should produce a low inflation future for India.
The rewards will be many. Our currency has been stable as investors have
gained confidence in our monetary policy goals, and this stability will only
improve as we meet our inflation goals. Foreign capital inflows will be more
reliable and increase in the longer maturity buckets, including in rupee
investments. This will expand the pool of capital available for our banks and
corporations. The government will be able to borrow at low rates, and will be
able to extend the maturity of its debt. The poor will not suffer
disproportionately due to bouts of sharp inflation, and the middle class will not
see its savings eroded. All this awaits us as we stay the course.
W
IV
I rarely expressed in public my deeper concern that some of the criticism was from quarters that were
motivated by their interests rather than economic logic. But in my last speech on inflation, delivered at
the RBI on Statistics Day, 26 July 2016, I wondered why uninformed critics were getting so much air
time. An excerpt from that speech follows, which ends welcoming the institutionalization of the fight
against inflation. Perhaps, years from now, we will wonder why any of this was worth debating.
Debate without Theory or Evidence
hy is it that as we seem to be bringing inflation under control, public
voices to abandon the fight are loud? Why is the debate uninfluenced by
the data? I don’t know for sure but let me hazard a guess; is it possible the
political economy of inflation is different from the received wisdom we were
taught in class as students?
Specifically, despite all the political breast-beating about inflation and
worries about its pernicious effect on the weaker sections of society, there seems
to be surprisingly little public anxiety about inflation so long as it stays in the
high single digits. Industrialists welcome negative real rates of interest for
obvious reasons – it keeps their cost of funding low. Many middle-class savers
value the high nominal interest rates on their fixed deposits, not realizing that
their principal is eroding significantly every year. The Keynesian economist is
happy because monetary policy is extremely accommodative. The analysts cheer
every cut in interest rates, no matter the consequences to inflation, because
markets are assumed to have a Pavlovian positive response to rate cuts. Even the
poor are inured to their fate of seeing real incomes erode, and are only aggrieved
when the price of some food staple skyrockets. Interestingly, short-term spikes in
food staples are not really controllable by monetary policy, which then leads to
the incorrect generalization that since monetary policy cannot control the
politically most important aspects of inflation, it cannot control inflation in
general.
With no powerful and vocal political constituency getting agitated about
generalized inflation so long as it is only moderately high, opponents of
disinflationary policies are free to frame the debate as they wish. The persuasive
way is to claim that interest rates are hurting growth. The argument is hard to
refute because there is always some sympathetic borrower who is paying
seemingly excessive rates. The high prevailing borrowing rate of some small
borrower – say 15 per cent today – is held out as Exhibit A of the central bank’s
inconsiderate policies, never mind that the rate charged includes the policy rate
of 6.5 per cent plus an additional spread of 8.5 per cent, consisting of a default
risk premium, a term premium, an inflation risk premium, and the commercial
bank’s compensation for costs, none of which are directly affected by the policy
rate.
The press is constantly urged to frame the debate as inflation versus growth,
and with inflation still only moderately high, only the excessively conservative
central bank could be against growth! Never mind that overly accommodative
policy today will set up inflation for the future; never mind that the last forty
years of economic theory and practice suggests that the best way central banks
can support growth over the medium term is by keeping inflation low and stable.
The reality, of course, is that high inflation is not stable. As we have seen in
India’s own past, and in other emerging markets, moderately high inflation tends
quickly to become very high inflation. The currency then becomes volatile,
leading occasionally to external stress. After all, one of the reasons we were
termed the Fragile Five in the summer of 2013 was because of our high inflation.
Moreover, the saver eventually recognizes that high inflation erodes the value of
his financial savings and switches to real assets like gold. Since we do not mine
gold in the country, this also puts pressure on the current account.
In sum, the fragilities associated with high inflation accumulate, and
eventually could lead to crisis. However, the belief that there is a strong
powerful domestic constituency against inflation in India, which was drummed
into our heads as students, may be a myth, certainly at moderately high levels of
inflation. Without any political push back as inflation rises, what is to ensure
macroeconomic stability?
Unlike more authoritarian Asian economies that used severe administrative
measures to deal with bouts of high inflation during their growth phase, our
democratic structure rightly does not permit such measures. So it is better that
we tackle inflation upfront by building the necessary institutions. Perhaps this is
why successive governments, in their wisdom, have given the RBI a measure of
independence. Certainly, such concerns would support the current government’s
decision to enshrine its commitment to low inflation through a formal inflation
target and the creation of a monetary policy committee.
Postscript: Now that the government has set up a monetary policy committee and given it an inflation
target, it would be appropriate for current and future governments to let the appointed experts on the
committee decide.
CHAPTER 3
MAKING THE BANKING SECTOR MORE
COMPETITIVE
I
The second of the five pillars was to create a more competitive and vibrant banking system. Liberal
economists in India though the best way to fix the state-owned portion of the banking system was to
privatize it. So long as the public sector banks (PSBs) had an umbilical cord attached to the central
government treasury, they would not have the discipline to reform, or so they argued. Others felt that
so long as governance in the public sector banking system was improved, there was no need for
privatization. Public sector banks could be an important vehicle to implement the government’s
mandates intended to achieve inclusion and development goals.
My own perspective was somewhere in the middle. I did not believe privatization would be easy or
fix the problems of all public sector banks. Perhaps one could start by privatizing one bank and
drawing lessons from it – IDBI Bank was often mentioned as a possible candidate because
privatization did not require legislative change. Be that as it may, I also felt many of the potential
benefits of privatization could be achieved if PSB governance could be improved substantially. At the
same time, I did not believe that it was possible to force government mandates only on the public
sector banks, especially as the banking sector became increasingly competitive. If the government
were, however, to pay banks for carrying out its mandates, there was no reason why private sector
banks could not participate. At any rate, knowing that there was little appetite in either the UPA
government or the NDA government for the liberal agenda, wholesale privatization was off the table.
Within the parameters set by the government, the RBI had to do the best job it could in reforming the
banking sector.
In addition to working with the government on PSB reform, my focus was on freeing up entry into
the banking system, especially for new banks that might target underserved clients, so that there would
be more competition and better service for all customers. In the Annual Day lecture at the Competition
Commission of India on 20 May 2014, I got a chance to explain the RBI’s strategy. I discussed the two
grand bargains that underlay the past, and why that had to change. Many of the possibilities discussed
in this speech were later translated into policy action. The work on banking reform was led by a
succession of very able deputy governors, Anand Sinha, R. Gandhi, and N.S. Vishwanathan, aided by
executive directors of the calibre of B. Mahapatra and Sudarshan Sen.
C
Competition in the Banking Sector: Opportunities
and Challenges
ompetition is the life force of a modern economy – it replaces dated and
inefficient methods while preserving valuable traditions; it rewards the
innovative and energetic and punishes the merely connected; it destroys the
stability of the status quo while giving hope to the young and the outsider. True
competition eliminates the need for planners, for as gravity guides water through
the shortest path, competition naturally guides the economy to the most
productive route.
Healthy competition is not just the best way to grow but also the best way to
include all citizens; what better way to get needed services to a poor housewife
than to encourage providers to compete for her money? What better way to uplift
a member of a backward community than for private employers to compete to
hire her for a good job?
Healthy growth-inducing inclusive competition does not, however, emerge
on its own. Without intervention, we get the competition of the jungle, where the
strong prey on the weak. Such competition only encourages a certain kind of
winner, one who is adapted to the jungle rather than the world we want to live in.
In contrast, healthy competition needs the helping hand of the government; to
ensure the playing field is level, that entry barriers are low, that there are
reasonable rules of the game and clear enforcement of contracts, and that all
participants have the basic capabilities such as education and skills to compete.
Governments have historically found it difficult to ensure such healthy
competition because intervention has to be just right. Governments typically are
tempted to go beyond intervening to create a fair competitive environment, and
instead have turned to determining winners and losers themselves. This typically
has not worked out well. With this caveat, the creation of a healthier, more
competitive environment in India could be the government’s most important
contribution to sustainable economic growth in India over the medium term. And
the Competition Commission will be a central player in this endeavour. Whether
in questioning existing government monopolies or the excessive market power
of private players, you will be a key institution in the years to come. And for the
sake of our country, I wish you the very best of success.
Today, I want to focus on the coming competitive environment in the banking
sector. At the Reserve Bank of India, we have spent a few months thinking about
how we see that shaping up, and I want to share that vision with you. My intent
here is to further the debate rather than to announce any final decisions.
THE GRAND BARGAINS
The degree of competition in the banking sector in India is best seen as the
product of two grand bargains. The first was between successive governments
and the banks, whereby banks got privileged access to low-cost demand and
time deposits, to the central bank’s liquidity facilities, as well as some protection
from competition, in return for accepting obligations such as financing the
government (through the Statutory Liquidity Ratio or SLR), helping in monetary
transmission (through maintaining the Cash Reserve Ratio or CRR), opening
branches in unbanked areas and making loans to the priority sector.
The second grand bargain was between the public sector banks (PSBs) and
the government, whereby these banks undertook special services and risks for
the government, and were compensated in part, by the government standing
behind the public sector banks. As India has developed, both these bargains are
coming under pressure. And it is development and competition that is breaking
them down.
Today, the investment needs of the economy, especially long-term investment
in areas like infrastructure, have increased. The government can no longer
undertake these investments. Private entrepreneurs have been asked to take them
up. To create space for financing these investments, the government has to preempt less of the banking system’s assets. But the nature of financing required is
also changing. Private investment is risky, so there has to be more risk-absorbing
financing such as from corporate bond markets and from equity markets. As
more sources of financing emerge, not only will banks no longer be able to have
a monopoly over financing corporations and households, they will also have to
compete for the best clients, who can access domestic and international markets.
Similarly, deposit financing will no longer be as cheap, as banks will have to
compete with financial markets and real assets such as housing for the
household’s savings. As households become more sophisticated, they will be
unwilling to leave a lot of money in low-interest-bearing accounts. Of course,
households will still be willing to accept low interest rates in return for liquidity.
So privileged access to the central bank’s liquidity windows will allow banks to
offer households these liquidity services safely and get a rent, but this advantage
will also become eroded as new payments institutions and technologies emerge.
The first grand bargain – cheap deposits in return for financing the
government – is therefore being threatened from both sides. Deposits will not
continue to be cheap, while the government cannot continue to pre-empt
financing at the scale it has in the past if we are to have a modern entrepreneurial
economy. This is yet another reason why fiscal discipline will be central to
sustainable growth going forward.
Public sector banks (PSBs) are, if anything, in a worse position than private
sector banks, which is why the second bargain is also under threat. As low-risk
enterprises migrate to financing from the markets, banks are left both with very
large risky infrastructure projects and with lending to small- and medium-sized
firms. The alternative to taking these risks is to plunge into very competitive
retail lending, so public sector banks may have little option, especially if the
government pushes them to lend to infrastructure. Many of the projects being
financed today, however, require sophisticated project evaluation skills and
careful design of the capital structure. Successful lending requires the lender to
act to secure his position at the first sign of trouble, otherwise the slow banker
ends up providing the loss cover for more agile bankers, or for unscrupulous
promoters. To survive in the changing business of lending, public sector banks
need to have strong capabilities, undertake careful project monitoring, and move
quickly to rectify problems when necessary.
In the past, PSBs had the best talent. But today, past hiring freezes have
decimated their middle-management ranks, and private banks have also poached
talented personnel from PSBs. PSBs need to be able to recruit laterally, while
retaining the talent they have, but to do so they need to be able to promise
employees responsibility as well as the freedom of action. Unfortunately,
employee actions in public sector banks are constrained by government rules and
second-guessed by vigilance authorities, even while pay is limited. It will be
hard for public sector banks to compete for talent. If, in addition, these banks are
asked to make sub-optimal decisions in what is deemed the public interest, their
performance will suffer more than in the past. This will make it hard for them to
raise funds, especially capital. With the government strapped for funds, its ability
to support the capital needs of public sector banks as part of the second grand
bargain is also coming into question.
We cannot go backwards to revive the two bargains – that means reversing
development and bottling the genie of competition, neither of which would be
desirable for the economy even if feasible. Instead, the best approach may be to
develop the financial sector by increasing competition and variety, even while
giving banks, especially public sector banks, a greater ability to compete. Let me
be more specific.
INCREASING COMPETITION IN BANKING
The Reserve Bank of India is committed to freeing entry in banking. We just
announced two new commercial bank licences after a rigorous vetting process.
We are examining this experience, and after making appropriate changes, will
announce a more regular process of giving licences – what has been termed
licences on tap.
Because of the public’s trust in banks and the presence of universal deposit
insurance, we have to be careful in giving out the normal commercial bank
licences. To be absolutely confident of the capabilities and integrity of
applicants, we give licences only to those who have a proven track record and
reasonable capital. But what of those who have no track record or no large
capital base but do have capabilities? And what of those who see value in doing
only one part of the banking business such as payments?
The RBI can take more of a chance with new players if they get the licence to
open only a small bank or to conduct only one segment of banking business.
Such differentiated licences – licences with restrictions on the geographical
reach or the products offered by a new bank – can generate more organizational
variety and efficiency. Small banks tend to be better at catering to local needs,
including needs of small and medium businesses. A payments bank, which will
take deposits and offer payment and remittance services but be constrained to
invest all its funds in safe instruments such as government securities, could be
very synergistic with other existing services. For example, the proposed Post
Bank could start as a payment bank, making use of post office outlets to raise
deposits and make payments.
Key in any new structure is that there should be no arbitrage possibilities
hurting the current banking system. Today, a commercial bank can convert itself
into a payment bank by maintaining 100 per cent SLR margins. Of course, it
may not want to, because it seeks to make more money through corporate
lending, but this possibility indicates regulations will not favour a payments
bank unduly. Some of my colleagues believe a payments bank will be unviable,
while others believe that it will skim the cream of banking business away from
regular commercial banks. We can debate this issue for a long time, or we can
experiment by allowing a few payments banks and monitoring their
performance. The RBI proposes to discuss further steps with stakeholders in this
regard.
If payments banks are successful, they will allow us to steadily reduce some
of the obligations we impose on commercial banks. For instance, as payments
banks hold government securities for liquidity purposes, we can reduce the
quantity of government securities we ask commercial banks to hold as part of
SLR.
While on the issue of bank obligations, there is an area where they do seem
to be at a disadvantage vis-à-vis other financial institutions – in the raising and
lending of long-term money. This becomes especially important for
infrastructure, where banks can be essential in early stage construction financing.
Since construction lasts for five to seven years, banks should be able to raise
long tenor money for these purposes. But if they raise such money today, they
immediately become subject to CRR and SLR requirements, and any lending
they do attracts further priority sector obligations. To the extent that banks raise
long-term bonds and use it for infrastructure financing, could we relieve them of
such obligations? This will immediately put them on par with other financial
institutions such as insurance companies and finance companies in funding longterm infrastructure.
The priority sector obligation will probably be necessary for some more time
in a developing country like ours, though we need to deliberate more on what
sectors should constitute priority as the economy develops. But even without
entering this potentially contentious debate, can we allow banks to fulfil existing
norms more efficiently? For instance, if one bank is more efficient at rural
lending, can it over-achieve its obligations and then ‘sell’ its excess to another
bank that is an underachiever? We are examining such possibilities.
Finally, we have had only limited success in achieving inclusion when it is
seen as a mandate. Banks sometimes open branches in remote areas but the
officers that staff them do not really reach out to the local population; banks
open no-frills accounts but many lie dormant… The reality is that if the mandate
is unprofitable, banks will find ways to avoid them. Not all forms of inclusion
can be made profitable, but we should give banks the freedom to try new
approaches, perhaps drawing in other institutions that can traverse the last mile
to the underserved where necessary. The RBI will come out with new relaxations
on business correspondents shortly. Also, some of the entities that become
payments banks may be very well suited to support or substitute commercial
banks in reaching remote areas.
In sum, then, we can increase competition in the banking sector while, at the
same time, strengthening banks by reducing the burden of obligations on them.
In this way, they will be able to contribute to sustainable growth even after the
breakdown of the first grand bargain.
FREEING PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS TO COMPETE
Let us turn next to the public sector banks. There are well-managed public sector
banks across the world, and even in India today. So privatization is not necessary
to improve the competitiveness of the public sector. But a change in governance,
management, and operational and compensation flexibility are almost surely
needed in India to improve the functioning of most PSBs, as the Dr P.J. Nayak
Committee has just reiterated.
A number of eminently practicable suggestions have been made to reform
PSBs, such as creating a holding company to hold government PSB shares,
increasing the length of PSB CEO tenures, breaking up the position of Chairman
and CEO, bringing more independent professionals on bank boards and
empowering boards with the task of selecting the CEO, becoming more selective
in cases that are followed up for vigilance investigations…
We need to examine all these ideas carefully, many of which will help give
public sector banks the flexibility to compete in the new environment. Let us
remember that what is at stake is not just the tremendous amount of national
value that is represented by public sector banks but future financing and
investment in our economy.
If public sector banks become competitive, and especially if they do so by
distancing themselves from the influence of the government without sacrificing
their ‘public’ character, they will be able to raise money much more easily from
the markets. Indeed, the better performers will be able to raise more, unlike the
current situation where the not-so-good performers have a greater call on the
public purse. Competition will improve efficiency. The second grand bargain
will also become irrelevant.
CONCLUSION
The banking sector is on the cusp of revolutionary change. In the next few years,
I hope we will see a much more varied set of banking institutions using
information and technology to their fullest, a healthy public sector banking
system, distant from government influence but not from the public purpose, and
deep and liquid financial markets that will not only compete with, but also
support, the banks. Such a vision is not just a possibility, it is a necessity if we
are to finance the enormous needs of the real economy. As India resumes its path
to strong and sustainable growth, it is the RBI’s firm conviction that the Indian
banking sector will be a supportive partner every inch of the way.
T
II
At the FICCI-IBA Annual Banking Conference on 16 August 2016, I went over some of the reforms
we had introduced. As we will see, bankers had become focused on cleaning up the bad debt on their
books. While this was important, I urged the banking sector to look ahead, beyond the problems of bad
debts, to focusing on growth. I addressed, once again, the challenges faced by Public Sector Banks,
and what they needed to do.
Interesting, Profitable, and Challenging: Banking in
India Today
hese are interesting, profitable, and challenging times for the financial
sector. Interesting because the level of competition is going to increase
manifold, both for customers as well as for talent, transforming even the
sleepiest areas in financial services. Profitable because new technologies,
information, and new techniques will open up vastly new business opportunities
and customers. Challenging because competition and novelty constitute a
particularly volatile mix in terms of risk. In this talk, I will speak about how we
see these aspects at the central bank.
INTERESTING AND PROFITABLE
Over the next year, seventeen new niche banks will begin business. In addition,
licensing for universal banks is now on tap, so fit and proper applicants with
innovative business plans and good track records will enter. Fintech will throw
up a variety of new ways of accessing the customer and serving her, so new
institutions that we have little awareness of today will soon be a source of
competition. These will finally draw customer sectors, firms, and individuals
without access today into the formal financial system. Those customers that are
already being served will be spoiled for choice.
For the service provider, even though greater competition will tend to reduce
spreads, new customers and new needs will increase volumes. Moreover, risk
and cost reduction through information technology and risk management
techniques will tend to increase effective risk-adjusted spreads. In sum then,
despite increased competition, profitability can increase. The comparative
advantage of banks may lie in their access to lower cost deposit financing, the
data they have on customers, the reach of their network, their ability to manage
and warehouse risks, and their ability to access liquidity from the central bank.
These should then be the basis for the products they focus on.
Perhaps a couple of examples would be useful. India will have enormous
project financing needs in the coming days. Even though bankers are very risk
averse today, and few projects are coming up for financing, this will change
soon. What is in the pipeline is truly enormous – airports, railway lines, power
plants, roads, manufacturing plants, etc. Bankers will remember the period of
irrational exuberance in 2007-08 when they lent without asking too many
questions. I am hopeful that this time will be different.
Here are ways it can be different and risks lowered. First, significantly more
in-house expertise can be brought to project evaluation, including understanding
demand projections for the project’s output, likely competition, and the expertise
and reliability of the promoter. Bankers will have to develop industry knowledge
in key areas since consultants can be biased.
Second, real risks have to be mitigated where possible, and shared where not.
Real risk mitigation requires ensuring that key permissions for land acquisition
and construction are in place upfront, while key inputs and customers are tied up
through purchase agreements. Where these risks cannot be mitigated, they
should be shared contractually between the promoter and financiers, or a
transparent arbitration system agreed upon. So, for instance, if demand falls
below projections, perhaps an agreement among promoters and financiers can
indicate when new equity will be brought in and by whom.
This leads to the third element of project structuring – an appropriately
flexible capital structure. The capital structure has to be related to residual risks
of the project. The more the risks, the more the equity component should be
(genuine promoter equity, not fake borrowed equity, of course), and the greater
the flexibility in the debt structure. Promoters should be incentivized to deliver,
with significant rewards for on-time execution and debt repayment. Where
possible, corporate debt markets, either through direct issues or securitized
project loan portfolios, should be used to absorb some of the initial project risk.
More such arm’s length debt should typically refinance bank debt when
construction is over. Some of the measures taken to strengthen corporate debt
markets, including the new bankruptcy code, should make all this possible.
Fourth, financiers should put in a robust system of project monitoring and
appraisal, including, where possible, careful real-time monitoring of costs. For
example, can project input costs be monitored and compared with comparable
inputs elsewhere using IT, so that suspicious transactions suggesting overinvoicing are flagged?
And finally, the incentive structure for bankers should be worked out so that
they evaluate, design, and monitor projects carefully, and get significant rewards
if these work out. This means that even while committees may take the final loan
decision, some senior banker ought to put her name on the proposal, taking
responsibility for recommending the loan. IT systems within banks should be
able to pull up overall performance records of loans recommended by individual
bankers easily, and this should be an input into their promotion.
Note that none of this is really futuristic, but it requires a much stronger
marriage between information technology and financial engineering, with an
important role for practical industry knowledge and incentive design. There are
also inputs to making project loans more profitable – such as the availability of
Current and Savings Accounts deposits – that will accrue to the banks that build
out their IT to access and serve the broader saver cheaply and effectively. Few
banks have the in-house talent to do all this now, but preparation is imperative.
An area of more intensive use of IT and analysis is customer loans, which is
my second example. It seems today that, having abandoned project loans, every
bank is targeting the retail customer. Clearly, the risks in this herding will mount
over time, as banks compete for less and less creditworthy customers. But some
of this risk can be mitigated if they do sufficient due diligence.
New means of credit evaluation are emerging. For example, some lenders are
examining not just credit histories from the credit bureau but mining their own
data and also data from social media posts by the applicant to see how reliable
they might be. Various forms of crowdfunding, intermediated by peer-to-peer
lenders, also claim superior credit evaluation. Of course, much of the hoopla
surrounding these new forms of lending has yet to be tested by a serious
downturn, and it is unclear how responsibilities for recovery will devolve
between intermediary and investor at such times.
Nevertheless, in this Information Age, not only are there more data with
which to determine a loan applicant’s creditworthiness, it is also possible to track
their behaviour for early warning signs of stress. Furthermore, in this
interconnected world, a borrower’s inability to hide adverse information such as
default when tagged by a unique ID constitutes a big incentive to repay.
Importantly, banks no longer have a monopoly over all credit-related data;
some IT companies may do a better job in pulling together even the bank’s data,
in addition to trawling for other available data, and analysing it all to make better
lending and monitoring decisions. Loan applications and decisions are now
being made entirely online, without a borrower having to step into a branch.
Alliances between IT companies and banks are likely to increase significantly.
The bottom line is that competition is increasing, and ways of delivering
financial services are changing tremendously. Banks have to discover strategies
to use their traditional, although eroding, advantages such as convenience,
information, and trust to remain on the competitive frontier. Competition and
innovation constitute a particularly volatile mix in terms of risk challenging
banks’ traditional risk management capabilities. They are also a challenge to the
regulator, who wants the best for the customer (and therefore wants to encourage
competition and experimentation), while maintaining systemic stability (and thus
wants to understand risks before they get too large or widespread).
THE AUTHORITIES’ DILEMMA
Before turning to how the banks should respond to these competitive and
technological forces, let us ask how these forces affect the regulatory compact.
Ideally, the authorities should ensure their actions are institution, ownership, and
technology neutral so as to ensure that the most efficient customer-oriented
solutions emerge through competition. However, if the authorities deliberately
skew the playing field towards some category of institutions and away from
others, competition may not produce the most efficient outcome.
Banks in India have been subject to the grand bargain, whereby they get the
benefits of raising low-cost insured deposits, liquidity support and close
regulation by the central bank (I am sure some of you see this as a cost) in return
for maintaining reserves with the central bank, holding government bonds to
meet SLR requirements, and lending to the priority sector.
In addition, public sector banks are further subject to government mandates
such as opening PMJDY accounts, or making MUDRA loans [Author’s note:
These were loans to small and medium enterprises]. They are also subject to
hiring mandates, in particular the need to hire through open all-India exams
rather than from specific campuses or from the local community, and to meet
various government diversity mandates. In part compensation, public sector
banks do get more government deposits and business, and are backed by the full
faith and credit of the government. While it is unclear whether the cost of the
mandates outweigh the benefits, they do skew the competitive landscape.
Authorities like the central bank and the government should, over the
medium term, reduce the differences in regulatory treatment between public
sector banks and private sector banks, and more generally, between banks and
other financial institutions.
Some of the differences between public sector banks and private banks can
be mitigated if the government pays an adequate price for mandates. If, for
example, when every direct benefit transfer is paid a remunerative price, all
banks have an incentive to undertake the business and open basic customer
accounts. The most efficient bank will garner more business, and the payment
can be gradually reduced over time, commensurate with the accrued efficiencies.
Some of the mandates will also become less costly with new techniques. For
example, banks are finding ways to make MSME loans more remunerative by
decreasing transactions costs. Similar techniques could be brought to agricultural
loans, especially as farm productivity increases. Wider use of credit information
bureaus and collateral registries should also help improve credit evaluation and
lower the cost of repossession. This should make it easier to meet priority sector
norms. The cost has been further reduced through the introduction of tradeable
priority sector lending certificates, whereby the most efficient lenders can sell
their over-performance, while the inefficient ones can compensate for
underperformance by buying certificates.
Nevertheless, over time, differences should be reduced further. This is why,
for example, the Reserve Bank has been reducing Statutory Liquidity Ratio
requirements steadily, and allowed over half of the SLR holdings to meet the
Basel-mandated Liquidity Coverage Ratio. But we are also trying to shape
mandates to new technologies and approaches. For example, it is mandated that
a quarter of a bank’s branches should be opened in underserved areas. But what
exactly qualifies as a branch? Could we accept alternative definitions of a branch
so long as they meet the needs of the population for a regular outlet for banking
business? Of course, all villages would love to have a full service brick and
mortar bank branch. However, if the cost is currently prohibitive, can we accept
alternatives that do much of what is needed? An internal RBI committee is
looking at these issues.
In sum, mandates should increasingly be paid for, and are becoming easier to
achieve as the institutional and technological underpinnings of financial services
improve. As competition increases, however, the authorities should ask how long
mandates should continue, and keep targeting them better towards the truly
underserved. They should also withdraw any preferential treatment, to the extent
feasible, at a commensurate pace.
Let me now turn to how banks respond to the emerging competitive
challenges. I will talk specifically about public sector banks, which perhaps face
the greatest challenges.
CHALLENGES FACED BY PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS
The most pressing task for public sector banks is to clean up their balance sheets,
a process which is well under way. A parallel task is to improve their governance
and management. Equally important is to fill out the ranks of middle
management that have been thinned out by retirements, and to recruit talent with
expertise in project evaluation, risk management, and IT, including cyber
security.
(i) Governance
The Bank Board Bureau (BBB), composed of eminent personalities with
integrity and domain experience, has taken over part of the appointments process
in public sector banks. There are two ways the government still plays a role.
First, the final decision on appointments is taken by the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet. Second, appointments of non-official directors onto
bank boards still lie outside the BBB. As the BBB gains experience, it would
make sense to allow these decisions also to be taken by it.
Over time, as the bank boards are professionalized, executive appointment
decisions should devolve from the BBB to the boards themselves, while the
BBB – as it transforms into the Bank Investment Company (BIC), the custodian
for the government’s stake in banks – should focus only on appointing directors
to represent the government stake on the bank boards. It is important that bank
boards be freed to determine their strategies. Too much coaching by central
authorities will lead to a sameness in public sector banks that successive Gyan
Sangams [Author’s note: An annual government conference to deliberate public
sector bank strategy] have criticized.
Management efforts to tighten practices are also needed. Far too many loans
are done without adequate due diligence and without adequate follow up.
Collateral when offered is not perfected, assets given under personal guarantees
not tracked, and post-loan monitoring of the account can be lax. The lessons of
the recent past should be taken seriously, and management practices tightened. A
more stringent approach to evaluating and recovering large loans will give bank
management the credibility when they go to their staff with plans for cost
rationalization.
(ii) Talent
The middle-management ranks of public sector banks are being thinned by
retirements. In addition, they need experts in specific areas like project
evaluation and risk management. At the same time, banks have to reduce bloated
cost structures. All public sector entities across the world tend to pay more than
the private sector to lower level employees, and less than the private sector to
higher level employees. This makes it hard for them to attract top talent, but
makes it easier to attract good people at lower levels.
Rather than seeing these as difficulties, perhaps they can be opportunities. In
the RBI, we find that our compensation packages enable us to attract very highly
qualified applicants at the Class III level. Perhaps part of the solution is to enable
such new hires, with technology and training, to do far more responsible work
than they were given in the past, and give them a brighter prospect of movement
up the officer ranks. Banks can also use the opportunity offered by retirements to
reorient hiring towards the skills they need, and to offer attractive rapid career
progression supported by strong training programmes to new hires – with
thinning middle management, the mix of experience and capabilities should shift
towards capabilities.
And to get talent in specialized areas like project evaluation, risk
management, and IT, they may have to hire laterally in small doses. While
contractual hires are currently permitted, better personnel would be attracted
only by a strong prospect of career progression internally. Banks will have to
think about how to enable this.
One of the difficulties public sector banks have is court judgments that
prohibit hiring from specific campuses. This leads to anomalies like the publicsector-bank-supported National Institute of Bank Management sending most of
its high quality graduates to work for private sector banks. Public sector banks
can petition the courts to allow some modicum of campus hire, especially when
the campus chooses openly through a national exam. Another alternative is to
make bank entrance exams much less onerous to take, with applications, tests,
and results, wherever possible, available quickly and online. The banks then
have an easier task of persuading students on elite campuses to take the exam.
We are following this latter course at the RBI.
To have local information, be comfortable with local culture, be locally
accepted, and be competitive in low-cost rural areas, PSBs will have to have
more freedom to hire locally, and pay wages commensurate with the local labour
market. Alternatively, they will have to be much more effective in using
technology to reduce costs. Finally, as banks adopted differentiated strategies,
they should move away from common compensation structures and common
promotion schemes across all public sector banks.
While one of the strengths of the public sector sometimes is the absence of
pay and promotion that is very sensitive to performance, too little sensitivity can
also be a problem as high performers get demotivated, and the slothful are not
penalized. An increased emphasis on performance evaluation, including
identifying low performers with the intent of helping them improve, may be
warranted. In addition, rewards like Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs)
that give all employees a stake in the future of the bank may be helpful. With
PSB shares trading at such low levels, a small allocation to employees today
may be a strong source of motivation, and can be a large source of wealth as
performance improves.
(iii) Customers
Public sector banks enjoy trust with customers. An emphasis on customer
service and customer-centric advice may allow them to recapture low-cost
customer deposits that are migrating elsewhere. Public sector banks should take
the lead in emphasizing the RBI’s five-point Charter of Consumer Rights. While
it is understandable that with stressed balance sheets public sector banks do not
want to make too many loans to sectors in difficulty, it is less clear why their
deposit growth is faltering, for the low-cost deposit franchise will be the key to
their future success.
(iv) Structure
Some banks may be best off focusing on local activity, and in effect, becoming
small finance banks. Others may be best off merging with other banks so as to
obtain scale and geographic diversification. As banks get cleaned up, and their
boards are strengthened, their boards should focus on appropriate structure as
part of an overall rethink on strategy.
None of these changes are easy, but they are also not impossible. It requires
work with the unions, persuading them of the need for change that benefits all,
especially the long-term future of the bank. Since each bank has different
challenges and probably different solutions, as these solutions emerge it may
also be the occasion to rethink the collective bargaining approach across the
public sector bank universe that now prevails.
BACK TO THE AUTHORITIES
Today, a variety of authorities – Parliament, the Department of Financial
Services, the Bank Board Bureau, the board of the bank, the vigilance
authorities, and of course various regulators and supervisors including the RBI –
monitor the performance of the public sector banks. With so many overlapping
constituencies to satisfy, it is a wonder that bank management has time to devote
to the management of the bank. It is important that we streamline and reduce the
overlaps between the jurisdictions of the authorities, and specify clear triggers or
situations where one authority’s oversight is invoked.
In particular, we have to move much of the governance to the bank’s board,
with the government exercising its control through its board representatives
(chosen by the BBB), keeping in mind the best interests of the bank and the
interests of minority shareholders. Wherever possible, public sector bank boards
should be bound by the same rules as private sector bank boards – one reason
why the RBI has recently withdrawn the Calendar of Reviews PSBs were asked
to follow. Similarly, board membership of public sector banks should pay as well
as private sector banks if they are to attract decent talent.
As boards take decisions, the Department of Financial Services could move
to (i) a programme role: for example, ensuring government programmes such as
PMJDY are well designed, appropriately remunerated to banks, and progress
monitored (ii) a coordinating role: for example, ensuring financial institutions
join a common KYC registry and (iii) a developmental role: revitalizing
institutions like the Debt Recovery Tribunals through appropriate legislation.
The RBI would perform a purely regulatory role, and withdraw its
representatives on bank boards – this will require legislative change. Over time,
the RBI should also empower boards more, for instance, offering broad
guidelines on compensation to boards but not requiring every top compensation
package be approved.
Given strong oversight from the bank’s board, the CVC and CAG would get
involved only in extraordinary situations where there is evidence of malfeasance,
and not when legitimate business judgment has gone wrong.
I have focused on the challenges public sector banks face meeting the new
competitive environment, as well as some possible solutions. These should be
viewed as opening a discussion rather than the formal views of the RBI. That I
have not discussed the challenges private banks will face is not because I think
they are perfectly positioned but because they are not as constrained as the
public sector banks. But before I end, let me emphasize an immediate area of
action for all.
With changes in technology, cyber security, both at the bank level and at the
system level, has become very important. I think it would be overly complacent
for anyone of us to say we are well prepared to meet all cyber threats. A chilling
statement by an IT expert is ‘We have all been hacked, the only question is
whether you know it or you don’t’. While the statement may be alarmist, it is an
antidote to complacency. We all have to examine our security culture. Too many
access points are left unmonitored, too many people share passwords or have
easily penetrated passwords, too little surveillance is maintained of vendors and
the software they create. The RBI is working on upgrading the capabilities of its
inspectors to undertake bank system audit as well as to detect vulnerabilities in
them. The RBI is also in the process of setting up an IT subsidiary, which will be
able to recruit directly from industry, and will give the Reserve Bank better
ability to manage and supervise technology. I would urge all of you to take a
fresh look at your systems, and more important, of the cyber culture within your
bank.
Postscript: Many of the suggestions in this speech are still relevant. In particular, the governance of
public sector banks can be improved only when the government distances itself fully from the banks,
creates a transparent and professionalized process for appointing its directors on the boards (not
dominated by governing party favourites or current or retired government bureaucrats), and allows
bank boards both autonomy as well as accountability in picking and compensating bank management.
Unless public sector banks are run like normal corporations, they will not be competitive in the
medium term. I have a simple metric of progress here: We will have moved significantly towards
limiting interference in public sector banks when the Department of Financial Services (which
oversees public sector financial firms) is finally closed down, and its banking functions taken over by
bank boards and the Bank Board Bureau.
I
CHAPTER 4
BROADENING AND DEEPENING MARKETS
I
As we gained confidence that the volatility engendered by the ‘Taper Tantrum’ in summer 2013 would
not re-emerge, we could focus on broadening and deepening our debt, derivatives, and exchange
markets. Once again, liberal economists wanted a ‘big bang’ removal of all constraints on market
participation. This was all very well in an economy that had well-functioning institutions such as a
bankruptcy procedure, so that those who took excessive risks would get their just deserts. In an
economy where such institutions were in the process of being developed, a ‘big bang’ reform entailed
uncertain benefits and likely costs. I preferred to follow the RBI’s traditional course of steady
liberalization, only asking questions of my colleagues continually of what the rationale behind rules
were, and urging them to up the pace of change.
In these reforms, Deputy Governor H.R. Khan was a pillar of strength, both with his intimate
knowledge of the markets, and with his determination that the RBI needed to liberalize steadily.
Executive Directors like G. Padmanabhan, Chandan Sinha, G. Mahalingam, Rajeshwar Rao, and R.
Kanungo provided strong support. A speech to the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India
(FEDAI) on 26 August 2016 summarizes our thinking and what we did.
Strengthening Our Debt Markets
want to speak today about debt markets and associated derivatives; why we
need them to be deep and liquid, why, in addition to central and state
governments, we need riskier firms and projects to be able to access the bond
markets for funds, why we need to encourage product innovation, and finally the
dilemmas that regulators like the RBI face. In the process, I hope to touch on
some of our recent successes, as well as failures, and our ambitions for the
future.
There are three important reasons why debt markets have become a lot more
attractive in recent months. First, we finally have a framework that commits us
to low and stable inflation. Yes, July’s inflation reading was a high 6.07 per cent,
but I have no doubt that inflation will fall in the months ahead. The key point is
that market participants know that the Monetary Policy Committee has to
maintain low and stable inflation, certainly over the next five years for which its
remit has been set, and it will do what it takes. This lowers the inflation risk
premium, and thus reduces the nominal fixed interest rate for everyone, from the
government to the riskiest borrower. In this regard, I am confident that Dr Urjit
Patel, who has worked closely with me on monetary policy for the last three
years, will ably guide the Monetary Policy Committee going forward in
achieving our inflation objectives.
A second development has been the reluctance of public sector banks (PSBs)
to lend, and together with private sector banks, the reluctance to fully pass
through past policy rate cuts into bank lending rates. Short-term market rates,
however, have seen full pass-through. No wonder highly rated firms are
bypassing banks to borrow from the commercial paper (CP) markets, with
outstanding commercial paper having more than doubled in the last two years to
over 3 lakh crores.
But what of lower rated firms? Unfortunately, the difficulty of debt recovery
in India has meant that credit spreads are wider than elsewhere. This is where the
third notable development comes in. Recent reforms of the Securitization and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
(SARFAESI) Act and Debt Recovery Tribunals as well as the new Bankruptcy
Code will help enhance the prospects of repayment, thus reducing credit spreads.
Given these developments, what should the objectives of fixed income
market regulation be?
THE OBJECTIVES OF MARKET REGULATION
As a developing country regulator, the RBI is focused on enhancing growth
while maintaining stability. In the past, this has meant that the RBI has moved
cautiously on liberalizing fixed income and derivatives markets. What is there
about these markets for central banks to worry about?
Typically, three issues. We have always worried that markets attract
speculators, and that in thin markets, the speculative element can move market
prices away from fundamentals. This is certainly a concern, but we should also
remember that not all speculators think the same way. So long as there is no
concerted move to manipulate markets (and this concerted manipulation can be
prevented by regulation), the varied opinions of speculators can provide
liquidity, which in turn can make the markets more immune to manipulation. In
other words, excessive fear of speculation in markets is self-fulfilling – it renders
markets illiquid and prone to manipulation.
Second, markets can be a source of competition for established institutional
players. For instance, as I noted above, high quality corporate credits can
migrate from banks to debt markets. This may push banks into higher risk
lending. Once again, there is merit in these concerns. However, too much can
also be made of them. After all, banks are supposed to lend to riskier clients that
need monitoring and hand-holding, while markets are supposed to lend to clients
who do not need such attention. Moreover, the problem in India is too much risk
ends up on bank balance sheets, either directly or indirectly. For example, NonBank Finance Companies (NBFCs) are supposed to take on greater risk, such as
loans to real estate developers, because their liabilities are longer term. In
actuality, though, many have substantial borrowings from banks. It would be
better from the perspective of systemic risk if they replaced bank financing with
market borrowing. More generally, some of the very large single and group
exposures of banks should be brought down by forcing large borrowers to raise
more market financing.
Third, we worry about unbridled innovation that attempts to get around
prudential and supervisory norms and ends up creating uncertain valuations and
systemic risk. For instance, the fixed income products and derivatives structured
around housing mortgage pools in the United States became hard to value as
house prices turned down. This was a primary factor in the Global Financial
Crisis. Once again, though, financial innovation has been useful in opening
credit to the hitherto underserved – the unfortunately named ‘junk’ bonds have
indeed facilitated the growth of a variety of enterprises and sectors, most
recently shale oil. While regulators have to weigh carefully the benefits versus
the systemic risks posed by every new product, we cannot simply ban all
innovation just because it makes us feel safer.
The broader point is that a measured and well-signalled liberalization of
fixed income and derivative markets will probably allow us to reap the benefits
of deeper and more liquid markets, while minimizing the risks associated with
speculation, competition, and innovation. Over the last few years, we have had
to proceed somewhat cautiously on market development because we worried
about creating vulnerabilities when global financial markets were fragile. But as
macroeconomic stability has strengthened, the movement has always been
forward. Yesterday’s announcements of additional market reforms were simply
the next steps in steady, measured liberalization. Let me explain.
PARTICIPATION
Greater participation adds liquidity. Over the years, we have tried to enhance
participation.
Most recently, even though retail investors form a small part of the global
fixed income market, we are working to enhance their access to the institutiondominated screen-based NDS-OM market [Author’s note: A market for
government bonds hosted by the RBI] so that they can trade government
securities, and also so that they can use their de-materialized accounts to do so.
However, in markets that require sophisticated understanding, such as complex
derivatives, we continue to be careful about broadening retail access.
We can be more relaxed about institutional participation. Foreign Portfolio
Investors (FPIs) will now have direct access to a variety of markets including
NDS-OM , corporate bond trading and perhaps other market segments going
forward.
One reason we limited institutional participation in the past was to prevent
speculation. So, for example, we required participants to be long an underlying
exchange asset, say dollars, in order for them to take a short position in financial
markets, and vice-versa. But sometimes the volume of importers hedging
prospective imports by buying dollars forward far outweighs the volume of
exporters, who hedge future receipts by selling dollars forward. To satisfy the net
demand for forward dollar hedging, typically banks have taken the other side.
However, to ensure bank stability, we have limited the extent of open positions
that banks can hold.
There is a cost to these limits. Every time the market gets imbalanced,
exchange rates have to move substantially to equalize temporary imbalances
between demand and supply, even if unwarranted by medium-term
fundamentals. This puts more pressure on the central bank to intervene.
We can certainly increase bank open position limits, and will do so over time,
but it would not be prudent to place all the exchange risk on banks. A better
option would be to allow more players to hold open positions without an
underlying, with some limits so that we do not get excessive speculation or
attempts at manipulation by single traders. This can rectify market imbalances,
improving exchange market liquidity and depth, without imposing large
demands on banks or on the RBI. The RBI took a fundamental step in this
direction yesterday by allowing a moderate open position to all market
participants. Based on experience, the RBI will decide further moves.
Finally, not all participation adds to liquidity and depth in Indian markets.
For example, some foreign organizations have suggested allowing trading of
domestically issued Indian securities abroad, only reporting the trades
domestically. Unfortunately, this could subtract trading on Indian exchanges, and
thereby diminish liquidity. We have suggested to such organizations that they
either conduct their trades on the Indian exchanges, or that they direct their
clients to Masala bonds [Author’s note: These are rupee-denominated bonds
issued in foreign locales that are discussed later in the speech]. The former is
still under discussion.
INNOVATION
Financial innovation is sometimes seen in a bleak light as a way to evade or
avoid taxes and regulations. Properly done, however, financial innovation can
slice and dice risks so that they are placed on the right shoulders. One example
of such an instrument is interest rate futures, where after an overhaul in 2013-14,
the last twelve months’ average daily trading volume was close to Rs 23 billion
(despite falling in recent months). An investor, bank, or corporation can use the
IRF market to gain or shed interest exposures as they desire. The key to the
success of this market has been to allow the design of the relevant instrument to
be governed by market participants, while ensuring regulatory concerns are
satisfied. We are proceeding in a similar way with money market futures
contracts.
Not all innovative instruments have been successful. Inflation Indexed Bonds
(IIBs) tied to the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) have not been very popular
because the RBI has moved away from a focus on the WPI to a focus on CPI.
Even the market for CPI indexed IIBs has been lukewarm. The moderate
investor interest perhaps reflects the disinflationary environment, where inflation
protection is less sought after. Also, unlike the more tax-protected Gold
Monetization Bonds, the CPI indexed IIBs are not fully tax protected against
inflation. Going forward, a level playing field on taxes is warranted for all
instruments, so that instruments do not gain favour simply because they get
better tax treatment.
The lesson from these examples is that financial innovation needs support,
not to create tax or regulatory arbitrage, but so that appealing features are
encouraged. Innovation also requires tinkering, to modify what does not work
until something more appealing can be found – the first versions of Interest Rate
Futures were not attractive, but later versions have succeeded. This is why the
RBI has moved to a sandbox approach, where we are liberal towards early
product innovations so long as they are not clearly problematic, regulating more
carefully only when interest picks up and the product looks like it might become
of systemic importance.
Finally, an important function for the regulator in encouraging financial
innovation is to create the necessary infrastructure. For instance, a number of
financial contracts are structured off benchmarks. RBI has encouraged the
setting up of the Financial Benchmarks India Pvt. Ltd which is building a series
of market benchmarks. I am hopeful that these will soon be used in innovative
financial contracts.
INTERNATIONALIZATION
As a current account deficit country, India needs financing from abroad. Ideally,
we would like to attract risk capital, which is in short supply in this country. This
means encouraging Foreign Direct Investment, as well as equity investment.
Foreign investors can also help deepen debt and derivative markets as they
contribute to price discovery and liquidity.
Not all domestic entities should issue claims held by foreign investors.
Ideally, of course, companies should be left to make decisions about what
currency they borrow in, and how much they hedge, but given our weak
bankruptcy system, there is moral hazard built into unhedged foreign borrowing
– if the rupee appreciates, the promoter takes all the upside associated with
paying the low dollar interest rate and the now-lower principal, if the rupee
depreciates, the occasional unscrupulous promoter goes to his Indian bankers
and asks them to bail him out. This is why the issuance of short-term dollar or
yen-denominated debt by infrastructure companies, if left unhedged, could be
severely problematic in case of rupee depreciation.
Therefore, we have encouraged companies that do not have foreign exchange
earnings to either issue long-term dollar bonds, fully hedged shorter term bonds,
or rupee-denominated Masala bonds abroad. The first issues recently of Masala
Bonds reflect a coming of age of Indian debt that has been insufficiently
remarked upon – for the first time in recent decades, the rupee’s value is trusted
enough in international markets that corporations can issue there in domestic
currency. Going forward, we hope a more vibrant Masala bond market abroad
will complement a vibrant domestic corporate bond market.
Even though FDI flows are enough to cover our current account deficit, we
are also encouraging inflows into the debt markets to improve depth and
liquidity. We have progressively expanded FPI limits in government debt, and
recently specified how these limits will expand for the foreseeable future. We
have also opened up investment in state government debt, and laid out the
medium-term plan for those limits also. In general, our aim is to liberalize
steadily, but in a thoughtful way, continuously asking how further liberalization
will strengthen our domestic markets.
We have not been persuaded by every market plea. For example, a number of
investment banks want a dollar-denominated G-Sec issued internationally –
ostensibly to create a benchmark dollar yield curve for Indian instruments. While
I agree such an instrument would be attractive for investors in the yield-starved
world, I am not persuaded it is useful for India. When much of the emerging
world would love to move from issuing dollar debt to issuing in its own currency
so as to avoid currency risk, I don’t see why we should move the other way.
Instead, let us build out an international quasi-sovereign rupee yield curve, so
that rupee issuances can be priced easily. It is with this in mind that we have
allowed banks to issue Masala bonds yesterday, with bank bonds being a good
quasi-sovereign proxy.
LIQUIDITY
Of course, not all parts of the rupee yield curve are liquid, even in the domestic
G-Sec market. At the very short end, we are trying to bring more liquidity and
better pricing through the auctioning of term repos. At the longer end, we have
been trying to focus on more illiquid securities in our open market operations so
that the term curve evens out. We are also proposing to encourage market
making in specific G-Sec instruments by involving primary dealers.
One way to bring liquidity to corporate debt is to enable them to be used as
collateral in repo transactions with the central bank, with appropriate haircuts, of
course. As banks become able to borrow against their high quality corporate
bonds, yields will fall, and more issuers will come to the market. With this in
mind, we have initiated the process with the government to amend the RBI Act
to allow the RBI to conduct repos of corporate bonds with banks and other
financial institutions.
RATINGS, CONTINGENT SUPPORT, AND SUPPLY
The ratings put out by credit rating agencies are important in assuring arm’s
length investors about corporate credit quality. In order for their ratings to be
accurate, agencies need both up-to-date information, as well as good analysis.
Agencies have asked the RBI to give them information about corporate bank
borrowings. Since these are available from the credit information bureaus
(CIBs), the RBI has suggested the credit-rating agencies become members of
CIBs. I do hope that incidents where a highly rated corporate bond plummets
without warning into default will become increasingly rare as rating agencies
exercise due diligence.
Some have argued that the easy access to bank cash credit keeps large
corporations from going to the money and bond markets for funds. This
phenomenon also raises bank exposures to single names or groups, increasing
their risk concentration. While, as suggested earlier, we are seeing some
movement of corporations to the money and bond markets in this period of bank
stress, we will nudge corporations further by imposing higher provisioning and
capital requirements for banks on such corporate lending when exposures
become large.
Many of the measures proposed so far will enhance the attractiveness of
highly rated corporate bonds to investors. But infrastructure projects that need
substantial amounts of financing may not start out highly rated. To enable such
entities to issue, we have allowed banks to offer credit enhancement to such
bonds. We have been careful to set the capital requirement for such credit
enhancement commensurate with the risk banks are taking on so that there is no
arbitrage. Yesterday’s announced measures should make it easier for banks to
offer appropriate amounts of credit enhancement.
One area that needs greater clarification is obligations of state governments
as well as state-government guaranteed obligations. In order for state
government obligations to have zero risk weight, and have the highest rating, it
is important that there be no explicit or implicit default or restructuring of such
obligations. While a restructuring may seem like a way to postpone obligations,
its ramifications, not just for the yield the market will demand of the particular
state government issuer in the future but also for the yields on obligations of
other state governments, are large enough that such actions should continue to
remain ‘unthinkable’.
REGULATIONS
We are conscious of the limitations placed on netting of derivative contracts, and
thus the higher associated capital requirements on banks. The issue has been
taken up with the government, and we hope to amend the RBI Act to make such
netting possible. As with the tax issues associated with securitization, which
have recently been addressed by the government, resolving this issue should lead
to substantial market activity.
Finally, while the RBI is a liberalizer, we have to be careful not to relax
prudential regulations simply because an entity or activity is deemed of national
importance. Dispensation on prudential regulation is the wrong instrument to
favour such activities. A nationally important activity such as infrastructure may
be very risky. To require lower provisions, or to allow higher leverage or ECBs
for such activities, may increase systemic risk. In the long run, the activity may
be damaged by the regulatory dispensation (too many infrastructure projects that
do not have dollar earnings will be financed with dollar or yen loans and cannot
repay) and stability may also be compromised. It is far better for the government
to directly subsidize such activities if it deems them important than for the RBI
to sacrifice systemic stability on the altar of national importance.
CONCLUSION
Let me conclude. While the RBI has been cautious in reforming during the
recent period of global market turmoil, it has not stood still. Market reforms
have proceeded at a steady measured pace. Observers may be impatient, but my
belief is that steady and irreversible reform and ‘mini Bangs’ like yesterday’s
rather than ‘Big Bang’ is the need of the hour. As global conditions become less
uncertain, the pace of reform can pick up. The lessons we have learnt during this
period on what works will be invaluable then.
T
CHAPTER 5
FINANCIAL INCLUSION
I
Financial inclusion was the fourth pillar of our strategy. I believed it was critical for sustainable
growth, as is clear in the speeches I gave on the political economy of our development (reproduced
later). In the Gadgil Lecture delivered on 13 February 2014, I set out some of what we intended to do,
based on the Dr Nachiket Mor Committee report, which had just been submitted to the RBI.
Financial Inclusion: Technology, Institutions and
Policies
he Dr Nachiket Mor Committee Report has given the RBI much food for
thought on the issues of financial inclusion. I want to reflect on the
recommendations, even while putting some additional issues on the table.
Financial inclusion is about (a) the broadening of financial services to those
people who do not have access to financial services sector ; (b) the deepening of
financial services for people who have minimal financial services; and (c)
greater financial literacy and consumer protection so that those who are offered
the products can make appropriate choices. The imperative for financial
inclusion is both a moral one as well as one based on economic efficiency.
Should we not give everyone that is capable the tools and resources to better
themselves, and in doing so, better the country?
Last week, I met with some members of Ela Bhatt’s Self-Employed Women’s
Association. In a room full of poor but confident women entrepreneurs, I asked
how many borrowed from moneylenders before they came to SEWA. About half
the women raised their hands. When asked how many thought of approaching a
regular bank before they came to SEWA’s cooperative bank, not one raised her
hand. Interestingly, many of them said that the loan from SEWA freed them from
the moneylender’s high interest rate, which gave them enough to service
SEWA’s loan fully even while focusing on other productive activities. I have
heard this from other micro-entrepreneurs – the highest return initial investment
is often to free oneself of the clutches of the moneylender. Despite this high
return from the delivery of credit to the poor, and despite much of our financial
inclusion efforts being focused on credit, we still reach too few of the target
population. So there is much more to be achieved.
We have tried to effect inclusion in the past through mandates – whether it be
through direction on branch opening or on lending to priority sectors. That we
are still far short of our goals has led some critics to suggest we should abandon
mandates because the market will take care of needs; if the poor have demand
for financial services, the critics say, providers will emerge to supply it. Markets
do respond to need, and competition is a very healthy force for improvement, but
market functioning can be impeded by poor infrastructure, uneven regulation,
natural or regulatory monopolies, and even cartelization.
While enlisting competitive forces wherever possible to compete for the
bottom of the pyramid’s business, as a development central bank we also need to
offer a supportive hand. By putting in place the right infrastructure and enabling
regulation, we have to encourage the development of the products, institutions,
and networks that will foster inclusion.
Let us start with products. We have been trying for decades to expand credit.
We have focused much less on easing payments and remittances or on expanding
remunerative savings vehicles or on providing easy-to-understand insurance
against emergencies. Perhaps we should try to expand financial inclusion by
encouraging these other products, and allow credit to follow them rather than
lead. Indeed, many successful organizations working with the poorest of the poor
try to get them to put aside some money as savings, no matter how little, before
giving them loans. Some of our self-help groups (SHGs) work on this principle.
Not only does the savings habit, once inculcated, allow the customer to handle
the burden of repayment better, it may also lead to better credit allocation. With
the power of information technology, perhaps the analysis of the savings and
payment patterns of a client can indicate which one of them is ready to use credit
well.
One roadblock to access, even to something as simple as a universal basic
savings account, is Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements. Experts have
emphasized the need to make it far simpler to open basic accounts, and have
suggested minimizing the required documentation. In an effort to do so, the Dr
Nachiket Mor Committee recommends requiring proof of only a permanent
address. This is nevertheless more onerous than current RBI norms, which allow
an applicant to self-certify her address and other details for accounts below Rs
50,000. But despite the RBI’s exhortations, few banks have reduced their
demand for documentation – they fear that they will be held responsible if
something goes wrong, no matter what the regulatory norms. The acceptance of
third-party KYC certification is particularly difficult.
Today, stringent KYC norms keep too many out of the banking system, and
lead to unnecessary harassment for others. Banks may adopt these norms more
because of regulatory or legal liability than to safeguard against true criminal or
terrorist activity. Can’t we do better? Some bankers suggest that by monitoring
activity patterns in accounts carefully, even while putting some limits on basic
accounts (such as holding a large value cheque for a few days before it is
cashed), much of the suspicious activity can be detected and stopped. Could we
allow a commercial bank some regulatory dispensation in case there is minor
mischief in some low value accounts, provided the bank has a reliable system in
place to detect greater mischief? Could the gains in easing widespread access to
safe accounts outweigh the costs of minor fraud? How can we get entities within
the system to rely on each other’s KYC, without the process having to be
continuously repeated? How can technology assist in effectively addressing the
above issues? These are questions we have to examine and address.
The broader issue is whether through sophisticated state-of-the-art
technology, we can offer customers products that are simple, low cost, and easy
to use. We have done this with mobile phones, can we do it with banking?
Payments may be another obvious product. I should note that our payments
infrastructure in India is very advanced. We have three large RBI technology
centres devoted to supporting payments and robust payment and settlement
networks for both large value and small transactions. We have introduced an
additional factor of authentication for all e-commerce transactions – which
makes these transactions more secure – and are swiftly moving to Chip and PIN
technology for credit card transactions. SMS alerts for bank and credit card
transactions are an important advance relative to even the United States, where
thieves find it easy to bill thousands of dollars to your credit card even before
you know it is stolen. All this means that we have the infrastructure to provide
cheap and safe payments and remittances. What we need are non-governmental
players to utilize this infrastructure to provide the products and access that
people want.
With over 900 million mobile phones, the potential for mobile banking as a
delivery channel for financial services is a big opportunity in India. We have
consciously adopted the bank-led model for mobile banking, while the nonbanks, including mobile network operators, have been permitted to issue mobile
wallets, where cash withdrawal is not permitted as of now. The key to cheap and
universal payments and remittances will be if we can find a safe way to allow
funds to be freely transferred between bank accounts and mobile wallets, as well
as cashed out of mobile wallets, through a much larger and ubiquitous network
of business correspondents. The Dr Nachiket Mor Committee suggests the
creation of Payment Banks as a step towards this goal. Other suggestions include
interoperable business correspondents who will get the scale economies to serve
in remote locations, and the usage of NBFCs as banking correspondents. We will
examine all this.
In the meantime, interesting solutions are emerging. Cashing out is important
for remittances, because we have a large recipient population in the country,
most of whom do not have access to formal banking services. We have recently
approved the in-principle setting up of a payment system which will facilitate the
funds transfer from bank account holders to those without accounts through
ATMs. Essentially, the sender can have the money withdrawn from his account
through an ATM transaction. The intermediary processes the payment, and sends
a code to the recipient on his mobile that allows him to withdraw the money
from any nearby bank’s ATM. The system will take care of necessary safeguards
of customer identification, transaction validation, velocity checks, etc. We need
more such innovative products, some of which mobile companies are providing.
In India, despite the high mobile density, it is also a reality that most of the
handsets are very basic ones and many of the mobile connections are prepaid
subscriptions. These are important constraints. We have a great opportunity for
banks and telecom service providers to come together to deliver mobile banking
services of all kinds in a seamless and secure manner to their customers. In the
next few months, we will accelerate the dialogue between key players.
One of the difficulties the poor and small businesses have in accessing credit
is the lack of information about them, both upfront as they are being evaluated
for credit, and after lending where the lender has to monitor them. If savings and
payments products are sold widely, and information, including payments to
mobile companies, utility companies, as well as the government, collected, then
the excluded can build information records that will help them access credit. If,
in addition, negative information on defaults is shared in a fair and responsible
way through the financial network, every individual borrower will have
something at stake – their credit history – which can serve to encourage timely
repayment. This, in turn, can improve the willingness of banks to lend.
Finally, let me turn to consumer literacy and protection. As we reach more
and more of the population, we have to be sure that they understand the products
they are being sold and have the information to make sensible decisions. Caveat
emptor or let the buyer beware is typically the standard used in financial markets
– that is, so long as the buyer is not actively misled, she is responsible for
researching her product choices and making purchase decisions. While this puts
a lot of burden on the buyer to do due diligence, it also gives her a lot of freedom
to make choices, including of course the freedom to make bad choices.
But with poorly informed and unsophisticated investors, we should consider
the Dr Nachiket Mor Committee’s recommendation of setting some guidelines
on what products are suitable for different categories of investors. Broadly
speaking, the more complicated the product the more sophisticated should be the
target customer. Should we move to a norm where a suite of simple products is
pre-approved for dissemination to all, but as products get more complicated,
financial sector providers bear more and more responsibility to show that the
buyer was sophisticated and/or appropriately counselled before she purchased?
Of course, the longer run answer is for customers to become more savvy. Can
the technology sector help educate people in financial matters? After all, finance
is not something most people learn in schools, but it is something they encounter
every day in the world. Low cost but high quality distance finance education is
something the country very much needs and we look to entrepreneurs here to
think of innovative ways to provide it.
Before I conclude, one caveat. Technology can magnify the reach of finance
for bad purposes as well as good. Many of you must receive frequent emails,
purportedly from me, informing you of a large sum of money that awaits you at
the RBI, and urging you to send me your account details so that I can transfer the
money to you. Let me assure you that the RBI does not give out money, I do not
send these emails, and if you do fall for such emails, you will lose a lot of money
to crooks and be reminded of the adage – if anything looks too good to be true, it
probably is not true.
Of course, technology can also offer answers to check fraud. Can we enlist
social media in enabling the public to identify fraud and help regulation? How
can we do this in a responsible way? Again, these are questions at this point, but
I am sure we will find the answers.
Let me conclude. Technology, with its capacity to reduce transaction costs, is
key to enabling the large volume low-ticket transaction that is at the centre of
financial inclusion. By collecting and processing large volumes of data easily,
technology can also improve the quality of financial decision making. When
products have network effects, technology can ensure not just interoperability,
key to obtaining the benefits of networking, but also security, key to maintaining
the confidence of people and preventing them from withdrawing from the formal
financial system once again. I sincerely hope the successful ICT industry will
partner with the finance industry to revolutionize financial inclusion in this
country.
W
II
I summarized what we were doing on inclusion in a speech in Hyderabad on 18 July 2016 delivered to
the National Seminar on Equity, Access, and Inclusion. During my term, I was trying to move us away
from a belief that mandates to the public sector banks would solve the problem of inclusion. Every
uncompensated unprofitable mandate was effective only so long as the bureaucracy and the regulator
monitored the banks closely. However, if banks could game the monitor and avoid the mandate, they
would. This was understandable since, ultimately, we held even public sector bank CEOs responsible
for profits.
To end this cat and mouse game, I wanted us to focus more on creating an enabling environment
where the poor customer was seen as attractive, and worth serving, even while we had safeguards in
place to prevent her from being exploited. I have to admit our success here was mixed – even as the
RBI tried to create the enabling environment, the government seemed more convinced that mandates
like the Jan Dhan Yojana and the Mudra scheme (for small loans) would work better. Of course, the
two could co-exist. The government was probably right that in the short run, the public sector banks
could be pushed to deliver specific mandates. So, for example, they could be enlisted to open accounts
for the poor. However, for sustainable broad-based inclusion, where banks go beyond the mandate to
actually serve the poor customer well, we have to create the right environment where inclusion is an
attractive, though not exploitative, proposition. So, for example, it is important to compensate banks
adequately for the transfer of government-provided direct benefits into newly opened accounts. If the
accounts are even moderately profitable as a result, banks would have the incentive to improve the
quality of their service and compete for the poor customer. In this vein, while supporting the
government’s agenda we also pushed for a change in the environment for inclusion.
The Changing Paradigm for Financial Inclusion
hat are the economic impediments to greater financial inclusion? Perhaps
the most important is the economic condition of the excluded. World over,
the poor, the small, and the remote are excluded. It is not just because the
financial system is underdeveloped, but because they are hard to service
profitably. Nevertheless, this is not a reason to abandon hope, but to ask how we
can overcome the impediments in the way of inclusion. The best way to
characterize the impediments are through the acronym IIT: Information,
Incentives, and Transaction Costs.
IIT
The excluded may live in remote areas or may belong to communities or
segments of society that undertake economic activity informally – they do not
maintain records or have signed contracts or documentation. They often do not
own property or have regular established sources of income. As a result, a
banker, especially if as is typical, he is not from the local region, will have
difficulty getting sufficient information to offer financial products.
A second concern is incentives. For example, loans are easily available only
if the lender thinks he will be repaid. When the legal system does not enforce
repayment quickly or cheaply, and when the borrower does not have any
collateral to pledge, the lender might believe that he will find it difficult to get
repaid.
The third impediment is transactions costs. Since the size of transactions by
the poor, or by micro farmers or enterprises is small, the fixed costs in
transacting are relatively high. It takes as much time helping a client fill out the
forms and to provide the necessary documentation if he is applying for a loan for
Rs 10,000 as it takes to help another one borrow Rs 10 lakhs. A banker who is
conscious of the bottom line would naturally focus on the large client in
preference to the tiny one.
HOW DOES THE MONEYLENDER MANAGE?
One of the primary motivations for the country to push financial inclusion is to
free the excluded from the clutches of the moneylender. How does the
moneylender boldly lend where no banker dares to lend? Because he does not
suffer the same impediments! Coming from the local community, the sahukar is
well informed on what everyone’s sources of income and wealth are, and how
much they can repay. He is quite capable of using ruthless methods to enforce
repayment. Moreover, the borrower knows that if he defaults on the sahukar, he
loses his lender of last resort. So the borrower has strong incentives to pay.
Finally, because the sahukar lives nearby and uses minimal documentation –
after all, he is not going to use the courts to force repayment – loans are easily
and quickly obtained. In an emergency or if the poor need to borrow on a daily
basis, there are few more readily available alternatives than the moneylender. No
wonder he has so many in his clutches.
How then should public policy approach this problem? I will now describe
three approaches: mandates and subventions, transforming institutions, and
moving away from credit.
APPROACH 1: MANDATES AND SUBVENTIONS
One approach is to push formal institutions into reaching out to the excluded,
even if it is unprofitable. This is why, for example, we mandate that banks
allocate a certain fraction of their loans to the ‘priority sector’ and that they open
25 per cent of their branches in unbanked areas. There are also interest
subventions that are made available for loans to particular sectors. Furthermore,
banks have been urged to open bank accounts for all under the Pradhan Mantri
Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), while today they are being exhorted to make loans
to small businesses under the Mudra Scheme.
Because there are positive social benefits to financial inclusion that are not
captured by the service provider (what economists call ‘externalities’), such
mandates are reasonable from a societal perspective. For instance, the higher
familial and community status a farm worker gets from starting her own poultry
farm and contributing to the family income may, on net, outweigh the costs the
bank incurs on making the loan. The bank cannot monetize the status benefits,
but a government can decide those benefits are worth generating and mandate
them.
In a similar vein, there may be network benefits from universal access – for
instance, direct transfer of benefits is easier when the vast majority of
beneficiaries have a bank account, and the accounts themselves will be used
heavily when account-to-account transfers are made easier through mobile
phones via the soon-to-be-introduced Unified Payment Interface (UPI).
Mandated account-opening essentially creates the universal network with its
associated positive network externalities.
There are, however, a number of risks emanating from mandates. The first is
that there is no market test of usefulness, and indeed, these may not be possible –
how does one measure the value of the enhanced social status of the poultry
farmer? So mandates are driven by the beliefs of the political leadership, and
may persist a long time even if they are not effective. Furthermore, some vested
interests may benefit from specific mandates and push for their perpetuation
long after they have ceased being useful. Bankers themselves, seeing little profit
in obeying the mandate, will try and ‘achieve’ it at least cost by targeting the
most accessible and least risky in the eligible category, and even mislabelling
normal activity so that it fits in the eligible list. Finally, some mandates fall
primarily on the public sector banks. As competition reduces their profitability,
their capacity to carry out mandates and still earn enough to survive diminishes.
So while acknowledging the value of mandates at the RBI, we have tried to
make them more effective. For example, the list of sectors eligible for priority
sector treatment has been revised, with an emphasis on targeting the truly
excluded. Specifically, the share of adjusted net bank credit (ANBC) that has to
go to small and marginal farmers (including share croppers) is set at 8 per cent
for March 2017, and that for micro enterprises set at 7.5 per cent. At the same
time, the scope for banks to meet priority sector norms without lending to the
truly excluded has been reduced. For example, large loans to firms producing
agricultural products no longer qualify. Also, banks are now required to meet
their targets at the end of every quarter, rather than at the end of the year, which
reduces the scope for window-dressing with short-term end-of-year credit.
Finally, Priority Sector Lending Certificates, which allow a lender to ‘sell’ any
over-achievement in particular categories to others who are deficient, are now
being traded, thus encouraging those who have a better capacity to make such
loans to do so. All in all, the priority sector mandate is now not only better
targeted at the truly excluded, but will be delivered more efficiently.
Mandates are not costless. Rather than forcing banks to recover costs by
overcharging ordinary customers, or by demanding recapitalization by the
government, better to bring the costs into the open by paying for the mandate
wherever possible. So, for instance, accounts or cash machines opened in remote
areas could attract a fixed subsidy, which would be paid to anyone who delivers
them. Not only will the cost of the mandate become transparent and will be
borne by the authorities, thus incentivizing them to make sensible decisions
about how long to impose the mandate, the mandate can be delivered by the
most efficient service providers, attracted by the subsidy. This is why the RBI
today explicitly subsidizes cash recycling machines set up in underserved areas,
and why central and state governments are paying banks for maintaining and
servicing specified accounts. Going forward, narrow targeting of mandates to the
truly underserved and explicit payment for fulfilling the mandate so that they are
delivered by the most efficient should be the norm.
APPROACH 2: CREATING THE RIGHT INSTITUTIONS
As I argued earlier, the moneylender is particularly effective because he knows
the neighbourhood and its people, and can make a good assessment of who is
creditworthy. A large national bank with a local branch suffers from two
infirmities. First, the branch manager has typically been recruited through an allIndia exam, is from a different state, and is not intimately familiar with the local
people. While many good branch managers do indeed learn about the
community, some do not. The higher socio-economic status of bank officers also
creates a distance with the poorer segments of the community, and their high
salary makes many branches in remote areas economically unviable even if they
could solicit business intelligently. Finally, given that the excluded do not have
formal documents, bank managers in large banks with bureaucratic centralized
procedures find it hard to provide effective service – how does one convey to
head office the rationale for a loan to an intelligent, enthusiastic tribal who wants
to set up a small shop, but who has no formal education or track record?
Local financial institutions, with local control and staffed by knowledgeable
local people, could be more effective at providing financial services to the
excluded. HDFC Bank, for example, has been very successful growing its loan
portfolio in Kashmir by recruiting local youth as loan officers. Certainly, this is
also the obvious lesson to be drawn from the success of microfinance
institutions, who combine their local knowledge with stronger incentives for
repayment through peer pressure and frequent collection of repayments. Indeed,
this was also the rationale for local area banks and regional rural banks, and is a
strong feature in the cooperative movement.
Yet, while there have been some grand successes among these institutions,
each form has some deficiencies. Microfinance institutions do not have access to
low-cost deposit financing, though securitization of loans has been a growing
avenue of finance. Local area banks could not expand out of their area, exposing
them to the geographical concentration risks. Regional rural banks agitated for
parity in salary structures with parent scheduled commercial banks, and having
achieved parity, find that their costs are not optimally suited for the clientele they
need to service. There are some very successful cooperative banks, on par with
any universal bank, but far too many suffer from governance problems. The RBI
has been engaged in bringing stronger governance to urban cooperative banks,
but split supervision with state authorities limits how much it can do.
To provide an alternative institutional avenue for these categories of
institutions to fulfill their mission, the RBI has created a new institution called
the small finance bank, where ‘small’ refers to the kind of customer the bank
deals with, not its size. With 75 per cent of the loans mandated to be below Rs
25 lakhs, the small finance bank is intended to provide services to the excluded.
Thus far, the licences have been largely given to microfinance institutions and
one local area bank, but there is no reason why these cannot be given to regional
rural banks and cooperatives in the future. The hope is that these institutions will
maintain a low cost structure, augmented by technology, to provide a menu of
financial services to the excluded.
New institutions can also help ease the flow of credit. For instance, credit
information bureaus have helped tremendously in solving both the information
and incentive problem in retail credit. When an individual knows that a default
will spoil their credit rating and cut off future access to credit, they have strong
incentives to make timely payments. In rural India, we need to expand the reach
of credit bureaus, including by bringing borrowing under self-help groups into
their ambit. The use of Aadhaar in identifying individuals will also help
eliminate duplicate records, while making existing records more accurate. Going
forward, by the end of the year, the Credit Information Bureau of India will start
providing individuals with one free credit report a year, so that they can check
their credit rating and petition if they see possible discrepancies. An important
proposal by the government is to give small businesses ‘Udyog Aadhaar’
numbers, which are unique IDs tied to both the entity as well as the promoter.
Such IDs could allow small firms to build credit histories with credit bureaus,
especially as the histories are tied to specific promoters.
Land is often the single most valuable source of wealth in rural areas. The
digitization of land records, accompanied by a guarantee of certificates of final
ownership by the state government, as proposed in Rajasthan, will ease the use
of land as collateral against which funds can be borrowed. Even a formal
recognition of share cropping agreements, as in the pattas registered by the state
government in Andhra Pradesh, could ease access to credit for share croppers.
As a final example, MSMEs get squeezed all the time by their large buyers,
who pay after long delays. All would be better off if the MSME could sell its
claim on the large buyer in the market. The MSME would get its money quickly,
while the market would get a claim on the better rated large buyer instead of
holding a claim on the MSME. All this will happen as the three TradeReceivables Discounting Systems (TReDS) which the RBI has licensed, start
later this financial year. The key is to reduce transaction costs by automating
almost every aspect of the transaction so that even the smallest MSMEs can
benefit.
APPROACH 3: DON’T START WITH CREDIT
We have been trying for decades to expand credit. We have focused much less
on easing payments and remittances, on expanding remunerative savings
vehicles, or on providing easy-to-obtain insurance against crop failures. In the
emerging financial inclusion paradigm, the government and the RBI are trying to
expand inclusion by encouraging these other products, allowing credit to follow
them rather than lead. Indeed, many successful organizations working with the
poorest of the poor try to get them to put aside some money as savings, no
matter how little, before giving them loans. Some of our self-help groups
(SHGs) work on this principle. Not only does the savings habit, once inculcated,
allow the customer to handle the burden of repayment better, it may also lead to
better credit allocation.
Easy payments and cash out will make formal savings more attractive. Today,
a villager who puts money into a bank has to either trudge the ‘last miles’ to the
bank branch to take out her money, or wait for an itinerant banking
correspondent to come by. We are engaged in strengthening the network of
banking correspondents; by creating a registry of banking correspondents, giving
them the ability to take and give cash on behalf of any bank through the Aadhaar
Enabled Payment System (which will also give them adequate remuneration),
and requiring that they are adequately trained in providing financial services.
Cash-in-cash-out points will expand soon as the Postal Payment Bank and
telecom-affiliated payment banks make post offices and telephone kiosks entry
points into the financial system. Perhaps, most interestingly, transfers from bank
account to bank account will become easier in a few weeks via mobile through
the Unified Payment Interface. A villager needing to pay a shopkeeper only
needs to know the latter’s alias – say Ram@xyzbank.psp. He feeds that into his
mobile app, writes the payment amount, puts in his password, and presses ‘send’
and the payment is made, with both getting messages to that effect. Neither
needs to visit the bank to take out or deposit money, no point-of-sale machine is
needed. With the price of smartphones falling sharply, we are on the verge of
solving the last-mile problem.
With the power of information technology, perhaps the analysis of the
savings and payment patterns of a client can indicate which one of them is ready
to use credit well. Small businesses, which use the services of an online internet
platform to sell, can establish a verifiable record of revenues that can form the
basis for loans. Indeed, we are encouraged by the emergence of full-service
entities that help the small business with marketing and logistics, while tying up
with a finance company to provide the business with credit. This will help the
carpet seller from Srinagar advertise his wares to the world, even while
expanding his business. We also propose to encourage peer-to-peer lending
platforms with light-touch regulation, anticipating that they may have innovative
approaches to gathering the information necessary to lend.
SOME ISSUES
Having highlighted the various approaches to expand inclusion, let me now
focus on some important issues that arise in managing the process. These are 1)
Know your customer requirements 2) Encouraging competition to prevent
exploitation 3) Ensuring some flexibility and forgiveness in financial
arrangements 4) The need for skilling and support 5) Encouraging financial
literacy and ensuring consumer protection.
KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER
Missing basic documentation is often an impediment to obtaining financial
services. Knowing this, the Reserve Bank has steadily eased the required
documentation for basic financial services. For instance, recognizing that proof
of address is difficult, especially for those moving location, RBI requires only
one document showing permanent address be presented. Current address can be
self-certified by the account owner, preventing the considerable problems
customers face when they migrate inside the country. Unfortunately, the RBI’s
instructions sometimes do not percolate to every bank branch – which leads to
unnecessary harassment for consumers, as vividly described by a columnist
recently. Going forward, we have asked the Indian Banks’ Association to devise
common account forms, where minimum RBI requirements will be printed on
the back of the form. It will, for instance, become clear that a very basic account
with some restrictions on amounts and transactions can be obtained with no
official documents whatsoever. [Author’s note: KYC requirements were
subsequently displayed prominently on the RBI website].
COMPETITION TO PREVENT EXPLOITATION
As I have argued, the excluded are typically risky, as well as costly to service. At
the same time, they are also liable to exploitation because they have so little
access. Exploitation may come from a moneylender who charges usurious rates,
or a banker demanding personal gratification for giving a government-subsidized
loan. The fundamental way to deal with exploitation is to increase competition
amongst suppliers of financial services. Regulation can help, but we should be
careful that regulation does not shut out competition, thus enhancing
exploitation.
Consider two examples:
Politicians are rightfully concerned about the poor being charged usurious
rates. So they often ask regulators to set interest rate ceilings. Of course, a clever
regulated lender can avoid interest rate ceilings through hidden and not-sohidden fees for making the loan. But let us assume the even cleverer regulator
can ferret out such practices (not always a valid assumption). Nevertheless, there
is still a problem. The lender has to recoup not just the credit-risk margin which
compensates him for the higher default risk of lending to those on the economic
edge, but also the fixed costs of making, monitoring, and recovering small loans.
If the interest rate ceiling is set too low, the regulated lender will not bother to
lend since it is not worth his while. With competition from the regulated stifled,
the poor borrower is left to the tender mercies of the rapacious, unregulated
moneylender. So interest rate ceilings have to have a Goldilocks quality – not so
high that they allow the uninformed poor to be exploited, and not so low that
they kill any incentive the regulated might have to lend. This is the very thin line
that the RBI has been following in setting interest rate ceilings for microfinance
firms. As institutional frameworks develop to reduce risk in lending, and as
competition amongst lenders increases, we can lower the maximum chargeable
rate.
In a similar vein, our regulations sometime prohibit the taking of collateral
for loans below a certain size to certain borrowers such as students or small
businesses. However, if lenders are not forced to lend, the prohibition on taking
collateral may lead to borrowers who can indeed offer collateral being denied a
loan. The impossible trinity suggests that you cannot limit interest rates, prohibit
the taking of collateral, and still expect the borrower to have the same level of
access to loans. Put differently, unless a regulation mandates lending, which it
rarely does, there is always a risk that ceilings on interest rates or prohibitions on
taking collateral will cut off institutional lending to some of the eligible. Our
regulations must be set bearing this in mind.
One reasonable compromise between protecting the poor and ensuring they
have access is to allow only unsecured or collateral-free loans to qualify for
priority sector treatment or interest subventions, but to also allow institutions to
take collateral if offered on ordinary loans, provided they have a policy of
charging lower rates on such secured loans. While this may force some who
have collateral to pledge it even if they do not have to do so under current
regulations (albeit with some compensation in terms of a lower borrowing rate),
it mitigates the greater evil of those who have collateral to offer being denied
credit altogether. This is certainly an issue we have to reflect on.
FLEXIBILITY AND FORGIVENESS
When people complain about the high cost of credit to small businesses, they do
not realize the biggest component of interest costs is the credit risk margin, not
the real policy rate. The credit risk margin is not under the control of the central
bank, it has to be brought down by focusing on improving the lending
institutional infrastructure, as I have argued earlier. However, even though a
system that allows for strong enforcement of repayment reduces the credit risk
margin lenders charge, it also imposes larger costs on unfortunate borrowers. So,
for example, should a student who chose the wrong college for studies and ended
up having to pay back huge loans with only a mediocre job be penalized for life?
We need a system that has some flexibility in repayment, so that those who make
bad choices or have bad luck can get some relief. At the same time, they should
not escape all responsibility, else we will see people borrowing excessively and
misusing the proceeds, knowing they can get away scot-free.
Keeping this in mind, our master circular on natural calamities allows banks
to restructure agricultural loans without classifying them NPA, provided there
are widespread crop losses in the local area. This prevents individuals from
exploiting the system, while giving collective relief when the area is hit.
Similarly, we have advocated that student loans be structured with an optional
moratorium period, so that a borrower can survive periods of unemployment
without being permanently labelled a defaulter. Going forward, we should accept
the possibility of individuals, including farmers, declaring bankruptcy and being
relieved of their debts, provided this remedy is used sparingly, and the individual
chooses bankruptcy as a last choice, knowing he will lose assets and be excluded
from borrowing for a period.
SKILLING AND SUPPORT
There is a widely perpetuated myth that access to financial services is all that is
necessary to set a poor farm worker on her way to riches. This is simply not true.
Clearly, access to institutional credit can help her pay back a moneylender, and
thus give her some relief. Access to a bank account can allow her to put aside
some savings, which protects them from the demands of needy relatives. But to
generate income in a sustainable way, she needs help – in acquiring the skills
necessary to raise chicken or cows or grow flowers, in marketing that product,
and in learning how to manage funds. Often, credit offered without such support
simply drives her further into debt.
Sometimes, people learn from neighbours as clusters start undertaking an
activity. Sometimes people already know a marketable skill and only lack credit
to buy the necessary raw material to produce or expand. More commonly,
however, those who want to encourage micro-entrepreneurship have to work on
a variety of supporting actions other than just credit, especially skilling.
Fortunately, in India we have a flourishing NGO movement that often works
with the government to provide the necessary support – as in the Jivika rural
livelihoods programme in Bihar. Increasingly, some banks have adopted a
holistic approach to support as they encourage micro-entrepreneurship. As the
government’s Skill India programme expands, it will produce more people who
can use credit well. Stronger linkages between the programme and financial
institutions will have to be built.
FINANCIAL LITERACY AND CONSUMER PROTECTION
Finally, as the excluded are drawn into formal financial services, they will
encounter aggressive selling and in some cases outright mis-selling. At the
Reserve Bank, we are conscious of our need to expand financial literacy so that
the consumer is more aware. In the coming weeks, we will be launching a
nationwide campaign trying to impart some basic messages on sound financial
practice. We are also looking to have financial education included in the school
curriculum across the country.
In 2015, the RBI came out with five principles that banks had to follow in
dealing with customers. We asked banks to implement this Charter of Consumer
Rights, and asked them to appoint an internal ombudsman to monitor the
grievance redressal process. We now will examine how banks are faring, and
whether further regulations are needed to strengthen consumer protection. We
will especially focus on mis-selling of third-party products such as insurance, as
well as the extension of adequate grievance redressal to rural areas, including
through the RBI’s ombudsman scheme.
CONCLUSION
The country has come a long way in the process of financial inclusion, but still
has a way to go. We are steadily moving from mandates, subsidies, and reliance
on the public sector banks for inclusion to creating enabling frameworks that
make it attractive for all financial institutions to target the excluded, even while
the interests of the excluded are protected through education, competition and
regulation. I am confident that in the foreseeable future, we will bring formal
financial services to every Indian who wants them. Financial inclusion will be an
important element in ensuring access and equity, necessary building blocks for
the sustainable growth of our country.
CHAPTER 6
THE RESOLUTION OF DISTRESS
I
The pillar where we made the least progress, despite the involvement of the best and the brightest in
the RBI, was in getting the banks to recognize financial distress and deal with it. This was also the area
where the prevailing mindset was shaped most by the existing weak institutional structure, making
change very hard without changing institutions.
The problem was most acute in the public sector banks, which had the greatest risk appetites in
2007-09 when many of the bad loans were made. The public perception was that much of the problem
was due to corruption, but while this could be true of some banks where the bad loans really
accelerated in the terms of specific CEOs, I became convinced that there were other, perhaps more
important, causes. These included the irrational exuberance and the tolerance for high promoter
leverage among bankers after the successful lending experience in the period before the global
financial crisis, the slowdown in government permissions in the wake of scandals post 2011, the
mindset of bankers vis-à-vis promoters, and the lack of instruments for recovery when distress hit.
We could do little about the past, and public sector bankers (with the exception of a few CEOs)
were becoming cautious about lending in any case, given the piling bad loan problems. We could urge
the government repeatedly to deal with projects held up because of government inaction, but results
here too were outside our control. Where we could have more effect was in changing the mindset of
bankers, and giving them more instruments to act vis-à-vis large promoters. The intent here was not
punishment – recognizing that public sector bank credit growth was slowing, I wanted to focus on
putting projects back on track so that economic activity would not be hampered. Instead, the intent was
to ensure that everyone absorbed a fair share of the losses, and these did not fall entirely on the banks.
As for fraudulent promoters, I felt the investigative agencies should proceed against them separately,
but their projects and workers should not be punished for promoter malfeasance.
Let me explain the problem of mindsets with an example. I remember early in my term a plane ride
in which an articulate and competent public sector bank CEO happened to sit next to me. As we
discussed the banking system, he described one notorious but prominent promoter who had been
playing off one bank against another in an attempt to keep his failing enterprise afloat. The banker told
me that the promoter had promised him repayment out of funds that were arriving but had diverted the
funds to another enterprise. When he got to know of this, the banker told me that he was angrier than
he had ever been before in his professional life. ‘What did you do?’ I asked the banker. ‘I cut his credit
line by 20 per cent,’ came the answer. I did not know whether to laugh or cry.
In most countries with a strong financial system, broken promises by an incompetent borrower
would be met with a complete cut-off of credit, and the initiation of recovery measures. In India, the
worst this angry banker was willing to do was to cut future lending by a measly 20 per cent! Many
promoters came from rich storied families, were well-connected and dominated the society pages. To
ask the banker to get tough with the promoter was to ask him to take on an icon of society. Some
bankers could do this with ease, many could not.
But there were two other impediments in taking action to restructure distressed projects to put them
back on track. First, despite having some of the most draconian laws on the books in any country on
recovering secured debt, these laws were effective only against small promoters, not against wealthy
promoters who could hire the best lawyers to play the judicial system to stymie the recovery process.
Second, bankers were always fearful of the investigative agencies, who could question a purely
commercial decision where debt was written down, and thus ruin the banker’s hope of a quiet and
honourable retirement. This made bankers very reluctant to agree to the deep significant restructuring
that was needed to set projects back on track – why take the risk when retirement was only six months
away.
What this meant was a collective reluctance to recognize the problem – indeed, when I took over,
we were only starting to implement a system to measure the aggregate exposure of the banking system
to specific promoters and the status of those loans. Effectively, this meant a strong desire on the part of
both bankers and promoters to repeatedly push the bad loan problem into the future, which meant the
problem had already grown to a significant size. This was something we needed to change. The first
step was to give bankers more instruments to deal with distress. The second was to stop the regulator
acquiescing to the problem by engaging in regulatory forbearance (that is, agreeing to turn a blind eye
to non-performing loans). The third was to force disclosure and provisioning for bad loans, so that
everyone knew the extent of the problem, and it did not grow to an alarming size sight unseen. That
would also ensure that the government could budget adequately for the growing hole in public sector
bank balance sheets, and not be surprised suddenly.
My speeches and commentary in this area were intended to lay out areas of action, but also send a
more subtle message. The promoters were not above the law, and should be treated as they deserved –
some with compassion because of genuine difficulties outside their control, and others with harshness.
I especially criticized promoters who lived the good life even while they had bled their companies dry.
This was as much a message to the promoters and bankers as to my own junior staff – top management
at the RBI would back them if they did their jobs.
Our staff worked hard and creatively to create resolution mechanisms and some incentive for
promoters to pay back in a system where they had little incentive to do so and banks had every
incentive to extend and pretend. Despite a slow and uneven legal system, and despite the absence of a
functioning bankruptcy code during my term, we did manage to force banks to start recognizing
problems, and did bring some promoters to the table to pay. Following our representation to the Prime
Minister, the investigative agencies started proceeding on cases of outright fraud with additional
vigour. However, all this is still work in progress, and much needs to be done.
My first major talk on the subject was the Kurien Lecture in November 2014.
A
Saving Credit
t a time when demand for bank credit is weak, even while we are likely to
have enormous demand for it if investment picks up, we have to ask if
India’s system of credit is healthy. Unfortunately, the answer is that it is not. We
need fundamental reforms starting with a change in mindset. A public lecture in
the memory of a great Indian who did much to change our mindsets is a perfect
place to make the case.
THE DEBT CONTRACT
The flow of credit relies on the sanctity of the debt contract. A debt contract is
one where a borrower, be it a small farmer or the promoter of a large
petrochemical plant, raises money with the promise to repay interest and
principal according to a specified schedule. If the borrower cannot meet his
promise, he is in default. In the standard debt contract through the course of
history and across the world, default means the borrower has to make substantial
sacrifices, else he would have no incentive to repay. For instance, a defaulting
banker in Barcelona in mediaeval times was given time to repay his debts,
during which he was put on a diet of bread and water. At the end of the period, if
he could not pay he was beheaded. Punishments became less harsh over time. If
you defaulted in Victorian England, you went to debtor’s prison. Today, the
borrower typically only forfeits the assets that have been financed, and
sometimes personal property too if he is not protected by limited liability, unless
he has acted fraudulently.
Why should the lender not share in the losses to the full extent? That is
because he is not a full managing partner in the enterprise. In return for not
sharing in the large profits if the enterprise does well, the lender is absolved from
sharing the losses when it does badly, to the extent possible. By agreeing to
protect the lender from ‘downside’ risk, the borrower gets cheaper financing,
which allows him to retain more of the ‘upside’ generated if his enterprise is
successful. Moreover, he can get money from total strangers, who have no
intimate knowledge of his enterprise or his management capabilities, fully
reassured by the fact that they can seize the hard collateral that is available if the
borrower defaults. This is why banks offer to finance your car or home loan
today at just over 10 per cent, just a couple of per centage points over the policy
rate.
VIOLATING THE SPIRIT OF DEBT
The problem I want to focus on in this lecture is that the sanctity of the debt
contract has been continuously eroded in India in recent years, not by the small
borrower but by the large borrower. And this has to change if we are to get banks
to finance the enormous infrastructure needs and industrial growth that this
country aims to attain.
The reality is that too many large borrowers do not see the lender, typically a
bank, as holding a senior debt claim that overrides all other claims when the
borrower gets into trouble, but as holding a claim junior to the borrower’s own
equity claim. In much of the globe, when a large borrower defaults, he is contrite
and desperate to show that the lender should continue to trust him with
management of the enterprise. In India, too many large borrowers insist on their
divine right to stay in control despite their unwillingness to put in new money.
The firm and its many workers, as well as past bank loans, are the hostages in
this game of chicken – the promoter threatens to run the enterprise into the
ground unless the government, banks, and regulators make the concessions that
are necessary to keep it alive. And if the enterprise regains health, the promoter
retains all the upside, forgetting the help he got from the government or the
banks – after all, banks should be happy they got some of their money back! No
wonder government ministers worry about a country where we have many sick
companies but no ‘sick’ promoters.
Let me emphasize that I do not intend in any way to cast aspersions on the
majority of Indian businesspeople who treat creditors fairly. I also don’t want to
argue against risk taking in business. If business does not take risks, we will not
get architectural marvels like our new international airports, the ‘developed-forIndia’ low-cost business model in the telecom sector, or our world-class
refineries. Risk taking inevitably means the possibility of default. An economy
where there is no default is an economy where promoters and banks are taking
too little risk. What I am warning against is the uneven sharing of risk and
returns in enterprise, against all contractual norms established the world over –
where promoters have a class of ‘super’ equity which retains all the upside in
good times and very little of the downside in bad times, while creditors, typically
public sector banks, hold ‘junior’ debt and get none of the fat returns in good
times while absorbing much of the losses in bad times.
WHY DOES IT HAPPEN?
Why do we have this state of affairs? The most obvious reason is that the system
protects the large borrower and his divine right to stay in control.
This is not for want of laws. The Debts Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) were set
up under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions
(RDDBFI) Act, 1993 to help banks and financial institutions recover their dues
speedily without being subject to the lengthy procedures of usual civil courts.
The Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interests (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 went a step further by enabling banks
and some financial institutions to enforce their security interest and recover dues
even without approaching the DRTs. Yet the amount banks recover from
defaulted debt is both meagre and long delayed. The amount recovered from
cases decided in 2013-14 under DRTs was Rs 30,590 crores while the
outstanding value of debt sought to be recovered was a huge Rs 2,36,600 crores.
Thus recovery was only 13 per cent of the amount at stake. Worse, even though
the law indicates that cases before the DRT should be disposed off in six months,
only about a fourth of the cases pending at the beginning of the year are disposed
off during the year – suggesting a four-year wait even if the tribunals focus only
on old cases. However, in 2013-14, the number of new cases filed during the
year were about one and a half times the cases disposed off during the year. Thus
backlogs and delays are growing, not coming down.
Why is this happening? The judgments of the DRTs can be appealed to Debt
Recovery Appellate Tribunals, and while there are thirty-three of the former,
there are only five of the latter. And even though section 18 of the RDDBFI Act
is intended to prevent higher constitutional courts from intervening routinely in
DRT and DRAT judgments, the honourable Supreme Court lamented on 22
January 2013 in the Union of India vs the DRT Bar Association case that
‘It is a matter of serious concern that despite the pronouncements of this Court, the High Courts
continue to ignore the availability of statutory remedies under the RDDBFI Act and SARFAESI Act
and exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 for passing orders which have serious adverse impact on
the right of banks and other financial institutions to recover their dues.’
The consequences of the delays in obtaining judgments because of repeated
protracted appeals implies that when recovery actually takes place, the enterprise
has usually been stripped clean of value. The present value of what the bank can
hope to recover is a pittance. This skews bargaining power towards the borrower
who can command the finest legal brains to work for him in repeated appeals, or
the borrower who has the influence to obtain stays from local courts – typically
the large borrower. Faced with this asymmetry of power, banks are tempted to
cave in and take the unfair deal the borrower offers. The bank’s debt becomes
junior debt and the promoter’s equity becomes super equity. The promoter
enjoys riskless capitalism – even in these times of very slow growth, how many
large promoters have lost their homes or have had to curb their lifestyles despite
offering personal guarantees to lenders?
The public believes the large promoter makes merry because of sweet deals
between him and the banker. While these views have gained currency because of
recent revelations of possible corruption in banks, my sense is that Occam’s
Razor suggests a more relevant explanation – the system renders the banker
helpless vis-à-vis the large and influential promoter. While we should not slow
our efforts to bring better governance and more transparency to banking, we also
need to focus on reforming the system.
Who pays for this one-way bet large promoters enjoy? Clearly, the hard
working savers and taxpayers of this country! As just one measure, the total
write-offs of loans made by the commercial banks in the last five years is
1,61,018 crores, which is 1.27 per cent of GDP. Of course, some of this amount
will be recovered, but given the size of stressed assets in the system, there will
be more write-offs to come. To put these amounts in perspective – thousands of
crores often become meaningless to the lay person – 1.27 per cent of GDP would
have allowed 1.5 million of the poorest children to get a full university degree
from the top private universities in the country, all expenses paid.
THE CONSEQUENCES
Let me emphasize again that I am not worried as much about losses stemming
from business risk as I am about the sharing of those losses – because,
ultimately, one consequence of skewed and unfair sharing is to make credit
costlier and less available. The promoter who misuses the system ensures that
banks then charge a premium for business loans. The average interest rate on
loans to the power sector today is 13.7 per cent even while the policy rate is 8
per cent. The difference, also known as the credit risk premium, of 5.7 per cent is
largely compensation banks demand for the risk of default and non-payment.
Since the unscrupulous promoter hides among the scrupulous ones, every
businessperson is tainted by the bad eggs in the basket. Even comparing the rate
on the power sector loan with the average rate available on the home loan of
10.7 per cent, it is obvious that even good power sector firms are paying much
more than the average household because of bank worries about whether they
will recover loans. Reforms that lower this 300 basis-point risk premium of
power sector loans vis-à-vis home loans would have large beneficial effects on
the cost of finance, perhaps as much or more than any monetary policy
accommodation.
A second consequence is that the law becomes more draconian in an attempt
to force payment. The SARFAESI Act of 2002 is, by the standards of most
countries, very pro-creditor as it is written. This was probably an attempt by
legislators to reduce the burden on DRTs and force promoters to pay. But its full
force is felt by the small entrepreneur who does not have the wherewithal to hire
expensive lawyers or move the courts, even while the influential promoter once
again escapes its rigour. The small entrepreneur’s assets are repossessed quickly
and sold, extinguishing many a promising business that could do with a little
support from bankers.
A draconian law does perhaps as much damage as a weak law, not just
because it results in a loss of value on default but also because it diminishes the
incentive to take risk. For think of a mediaeval businessman who knows he will
be imprisoned or even beheaded if he defaults. What incentive will he have to
engage in innovative but risky business? Is it any wonder that business was very
conservative then? Indeed, Viral Acharya of NYU and Krishnamurthi
Subramanian of ISB show in a compelling study that innovation is lower in
countries with much stricter creditor rights. Or put differently, the solution to our
current problems is not to make the laws even more draconian but to see how we
can get more equitable and efficiency-enhancing sharing of losses on default.
A final consequence of the inequitable sharing of losses in distress is that it
brings the whole free enterprise system into disrepute. When some businessmen
enjoy a privileged existence, risking other people’s money but never their own,
the public and their representatives get angry. I have met numerous
parliamentarians who are outraged at the current state of affairs. If the resolution
of these issues is taken out of the realm of the commercial into the realm of the
political, it will set back industrial growth. Reforms therefore assume urgency.
What we need is a more balanced system, one that forces the large borrower
to share more pain, while being a little more friendly to the small borrower. The
system should shut down businesses that have no hope of creating value, while
reviving and preserving those that can add value. And the system should
preserve the priority of contracts, giving creditors a greater share and greater
control when the enterprise is unable to pay, while requiring promoters to give
up more.
A BETTER BALANCE
How do we achieve this better balance?
Let us start with better capital structures. The reason so many projects are
in trouble today is because they were structured upfront with too little
equity, sometimes borrowed by the promoter from elsewhere. And some
promoters find ways to take out the equity as soon as the project gets
going, so there really is no cushion when bad times hit. Lenders should
insist on more real equity up front, and monitor the project closely to
ensure it stays in. Promoters should not try and finance mega projects
with tiny slivers of equity. We also need to encourage more institutional
investors, who have the wherewithal to monitor promoters, to bring
equity capital into projects.
Banks need to react more quickly and in a concerted way to borrower
distress. The longer the delay in dealing with the borrower’s financial
distress, the greater the loss in enterprise value. Some banks are more
agile (and have better lawyers), so the promoter continues servicing them
while defaulting on other banks. In the absence of an efficient bankruptcy
process that brings lenders together, the RBI has mandated the formation
of a Joint Lending Forum (JLF) of lenders when the first signs of distress
are perceived. The JLF is required to find a way to deal with the
distressed enterprise quickly, with options ranging from liquidation to
restructuring. In this way, we hope to coordinate lenders and prevent the
borrower from playing one off against the other.
The government’s plan to expand the number of DRTs and DRATs is
timely, and will be most effective if also accompanied by an expansion in
facilities, trained personnel, and electronic filing and tracking of cases, as
suggested by the Supreme Court. Also
Some monetary incentives to tribunals for bringing down the
average duration of cases, without compromising on due process,
could be contemplated.
Some limit on the number of stays each party can ask for could
also be thought of.
Appeals to the DRAT should not be a matter of course. Indeed,
DRATs should require borrower appellants to deposit a portion of
the money ordered to be paid by the DRT as laid down in the law
as a matter of course, rather than routinely waiving such deposits
as is reported to be the current practice.
It is worth examining if appellants should be made to pay the real
costs of delay out of their own pockets if unsuccessful, where the
costs include the interest costs of postponed payments.
As suggested by the Supreme Court, Constitutional Courts should respect
the spirit of the laws and entertain fewer appeals. It is hard to see what
points of law or judicial administration are raised by the standard
commercial case, and routine judicial intervention favours the
recalcitrant borrower at the expense of the lender.
Challenging the orders of DRT and DRAT before courts should be
made costlier for the appellants. Courts should require them to
deposit the undisputed portion of the loan before admitting the
case so that routine frivolous appeals diminish.
The system also needs professional turnaround agents who can step in in
the place of promoters. Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) were
meant to do this, but they need more capital and better management
capabilities. Also, there is a requirement that they hand the enterprise
back to the original promoter once they have generated enough value to
repay the original debts. Such a requirement is misconceived and needs
to be repealed, else ARCs have little incentive to spend effort and money
to turn around firms. They will simply be liquidators, as they have
largely proven to be so far. I should mention that the RBI is open to more
firms applying for licences as ARCs.
The government is working on a new bankruptcy law, which is very
much needed. Properly structured, this will help bring clarity,
predictability, and fairness to the restructuring process.
FLEXIBILITY NOT FORBEARANCE
Finally, let me end on a current concern that pertains to the RBI’s regulation that
is not unrelated to the issues discussed in this lecture. Today, a large number of
industries are getting together with banks to clamour for regulatory forbearance.
They want the RBI to be ‘realistic’ and postpone any recognition of bad loans.
This is short-sighted, especially on the part of the banks. Today, the market
does not distinguish much between non-performing loans and restructured loans,
preferring to call them both stressed loans and discounting bank value
accordingly. Mutilating Shakespeare, an NPA by any other name smells as bad!
Indeed, because forbearance makes bank balance sheets opaque, they may smell
worse to analysts and investors. The fundamental lesson of every situation of
banking stress in recent years across the world is to recognize and flag the
problem loans quickly and deal with them. So regulatory forbearance, which is a
euphemism for regulators collaborating with banks to hide problems and push
them into the future, is a bad idea.
Moreover, forbearance allows banks to postpone provisioning for bad loans.
So when eventually the hidden bad loans cannot be disguised any more, the hit
to the bank’s income and balance sheet is larger and more unexpected. This
could precipitate investor anxiety about the state of the bank, and in the case of
public sector banks, leave a bigger hole for the government to fill. These are yet
more reasons to end forbearance. Or put differently, forbearance is ostrich-like
behaviour, hoping the problem will go away. It is not realism but naiveté, for the
lesson from across the world is that the problems only get worse as one buries
one’s head in the sand.
At the same time, the banks have also been asking the regulator for greater
flexibility to restructure loans so as to align them with the project’s cash flows,
and for the ability to take equity so as to get some upside in distressed projects.
These are more legitimate requests as they imply a desire to deal more
effectively with distress. The regulator has been reluctant to afford banks this
flexibility in the past because it has been misused by bank management.
Nevertheless, recognizing that it cannot micromanage the resolution of distress,
the RBI is exploring ways to allow banks more flexibility in restructuring. This
is a risk we are prepared to take if it allows more projects to be set on the track
to recovery.
In sum, the RBI opposes forbearance which simply pushes problems into the
future, while it will allow more flexibility so that problem loans can be dealt
with effectively today. Let us also be clear that we will be watchful for misuse of
flexibility and will deal severely with it if it occurs.
CONCLUSION
Let me conclude. Perhaps the reason we have been so willing to protect the
borrower against the creditor is that the hated moneylender looms large in our
collective psyche. But the large borrower today is not a helpless illiterate peasant
and the lender today is typically not the sahukar but the public sector bank – in
other words, we are the lender. When the large promoter defaults wilfully or
does not cooperate in repayment to the public sector bank, he robs each one of us
taxpayers, even while making it costlier to fund the new investment our
economy needs.
The solution is not more draconian laws, which the large borrower may well
circumvent and which may entrap the small borrower, but a more timely and fair
application of current laws. We also need new institutions such as bankruptcy
courts and turnaround agents. Finally, we need a change in mindset, where the
willful or non-cooperative defaulter is not lionized as a captain of industry, but
justly chastized as a freeloader on the hardworking people of this country. I am
sure that is a change in mindset that Dr Verghese Kurien would approve of.
O
II
In the absence of a functioning bankruptcy code, the RBI put together a number of schemes to
facilitate bank resolution of distress. We repeatedly re-examined the schemes to see how they could be
tweaked to facilitate resolution. Unfortunately, with the exception of a few hard-charging and
conscientious bankers, the general mood among the bankers was to continue to extend and pretend.
They feared they would be held accountable for any concession they made, and constantly (and
perhaps understandably) avoided taking decisions. In this environment, the idea of a bad bank, funded
by the government, that would take the loans off their books, kept cropping up. I just saw this as
shifting loans from one government pocket (the public sector banks) to another (the bad bank) and did
not see how it would improve matters. Indeed, if the bad bank were in the public sector, the reluctance
to act would merely be shifted to the bad bank. Why not instead infuse the capital that would be given
to the bad bank directly into the public sector banks? Alternatively, if the bad bank were to be in the
private sector, the reluctance of public sector banks to sell loans to the bad bank at a significant haircut
would still prevail. Once again, it would solve nothing.
As we found banks reluctant to recognize problems, we decided not just to end forbearance but
also to force them to clean up their balance sheets. The Asset Quality Review, initiated in 2015, was
the first major exercise of this nature in India, ably led by Deputy Governor Mundra. I would
especially highlight the role of two extremely polite and self-effacing but tough-as-nails ladies, Chief
General Manager Parvathy Sundar and Executive Director Meena Hemchandra, who really energized
their staff and assured them of their support at every turn. The young team they put together was
tireless, and made me aware once again of what we are capable of if we put our minds to it.
Every situation of banking sector stress I have ever studied was fixed only by recognizing the
problem, resolving the bad loans, and recapitalizing the banks. India was no exception, but once again
there were a bunch of critics who claimed that cleaning up the bad loan problem was what led to the
slowing of credit by the public sector banks. In a speech in June 2016 in Bengaluru, I made the case
for the clean-up once again by asking these critics to actually look at data, which showed the
slowdown started before the clean-up, probably as banks became aware of the magnitude of the
problem.
Resolving Stress in the Banking System
rdinarily, in a city like Bengaluru, we would talk about startups. Today,
however, I want to talk about the resolution of financial distress. I want to
refute the argument that monetary policy has been too tight. Instead, I will argue
that the slowdown in credit growth has been largely because of stress in the
public sector banking, which will not be fixed by a cut in interest rates. Instead,
what is required is a clean-up of the balance sheets of public sector banks, which
is what is under way and needs to be taken to its logical conclusion. Specifically,
I will describe what we have been doing in India to change the culture
surrounding the loan contract. To start, let us look at public sector credit growth
compared with the growth in credit by the new private banks [Author’s note: I
have omitted the charts this talk was based on, but they are available at
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=1009]
PUBLIC SECTOR LENDING VS PRIVATE SECTOR LENDING
The data indicate public sector bank non-food credit growth has been falling
relative to credit growth from the new private sector banks since early 2014.
This is reflected not only in credit to industry but also in micro and small
enterprise credit. The relative slowdown in credit growth, albeit not so dramatic,
is also seen in agriculture, though growth is picking up once again. Whenever
one sees a slowdown in lending, one could conclude there is no demand for
credit – firms are not investing. But what we see here is a slowdown in lending
by public sector banks vis-à-vis private sector banks. Why is that?
The immediate conclusion one should draw is that this is something affecting
credit supply from the public sector banks specifically, perhaps it is the lack of
bank capital. Yet if we look at retail loan growth, and specifically housing loans,
public sector bank loan growth approaches private sector bank growth. The lack
of capital therefore cannot be the culprit. Rather than an across-the-board
shrinkage of public sector lending, there seems to be a shrinkage in certain areas
of high credit exposure, specifically in loans to industry and to small enterprises.
The more appropriate conclusion then is that public sector banks have been
shrinking exposure to infrastructure and industry risk right from early 2014
because of mounting distress on their past loans. Private sector banks, many of
which did not have these past exposures, were more willing to service the
mounting demand from both their traditional borrowers, as well as some of those
corporates denied by the public sector banks. Given, however, that public sector
banks are much bigger than private sector banks, private sector banks cannot
substitute fully for the slowdown in public sector bank credit. We absolutely
need to get public sector banks back into lending to industry and infrastructure,
else credit and growth will suffer as the economy picks up.
These data refute another argument made by those who do not look at the
evidence – that stress in the corporate world is because of high interest rates.
Interest rates set by private banks are usually equal or higher than rates set by
public sector banks. Yet their credit growth does not seem to have suffered. The
logical conclusion therefore must be that it is not the level of interest rates that is
the problem. Instead, stress is because of the loans already on PSB balance
sheets, and their unwillingness to lend more to those sectors to which they have
high exposure.
There are two sources of distressed loans – the fundamentals of the borrower
not being good, and the ability of the lender to collect being weak. Both are at
work in the current distress.
THE SOURCES OF LENDING DISTRESS: BAD FUNDAMENTALS
Why have bad loans been made? A number of these loans were made in 2007-
08. Economic growth was strong and the possibilities limitless. Deposit growth
in public sector banks was rapid, and a number of infrastructure projects such as
power plants had been completed on time and within budget. It is at such times
that banks make mistakes. They extrapolate past growth and performance to the
future. So they are willing to accept higher leverage in projects, and less
promoter equity. Indeed, sometimes banks signed up to lend based on project
reports by the promoter’s investment bank, without doing their own due
diligence. One promoter told me about how he was pursued then by banks
waving cheque books, asking him to name the amount he wanted. This is the
historic phenomenon of irrational exuberance, common across countries at such
a phase in the cycle.
The problem is that growth does not always take place as expected. The years
of strong global growth before the global financial crisis were followed by a
slowdown, which extended even to India, showing how much more integrated
we had become with the world. Strong demand projections for various projects
were shown to be increasingly unrealistic as domestic demand slowed down.
Moreover, a variety of governance problems coupled with the fear of
investigation slowed down bureaucratic decision making in Delhi, and
permissions for infrastructure projects became hard to get. Project cost overruns
escalated for stalled projects and they became increasingly unable to service
debt.
I am not saying that there was no malfeasance – the country’s investigative
agencies are looking into some cases such as those where undue influence was
used in getting loans, or where actual fraud has been committed by diverting
funds out of a company, either through over-invoicing imports sourced via a
promoter-owned subsidiary abroad or exporting to related shell companies
abroad and then claiming they defaulted. I am saying that, typically, there were
factors other than malfeasance at play, and a number of genuine committed
entrepreneurs are in trouble, as are banks that made reasonable business
decisions given what they knew then.
THE SOURCES OF LENDING DISTRESS: POOR MONITORING AND COLLECTION
The truth is, even sensible lending will entail default. A banker who lends with
the intent of never experiencing a default is probably over-conservative and will
lend to too few projects, thus hurting growth. But sensible lending means careful
assessment up front of project prospects, which I have argued may have been
marred by irrational exuberance or excessive dependence on evaluations by
others. Deficiencies in evaluation can be somewhat compensated for by careful
post-lending monitoring, including careful documentation and perfection of
collateral, as well as ensuring assets backing promoter guarantees are registered
and tracked. Unfortunately, too many projects were left weakly monitored, even
as costs increased. Banks may have expected the lead bank to exercise adequate
due diligence, but this did not always happen. Moreover, as a project went into
distress, private banks were sometimes more agile in securing their positions
with additional collateral from the promoter, or getting repaid, even while public
sector banks continued supporting projects with fresh loans. Promoters astutely
stopped infusing equity, and sometimes even stopped putting in effort, knowing
the project was unlikely to repay given the debt overhang.
The process for collection, despite laws like SARFAESI intended to speed up
secured debt collection, has been prolonged and costly, especially when banks
face large, well-connected promoters. The government has proposed reforms to
the judicial process, including speeding up the functioning of the Debt Recovery
Tribunals, which should make it easier for banks to collect, but those legislative
reforms are before Parliament. Knowing that banks would find it hard to collect,
some promoters encouraged them to ‘double-up’ by expanding the scale of the
project, even though the initial scale was unable to service debt. Of course, the
unscrupulous among the promoters continued to divert money from the
expanded lending, increasing the size of the problem on bank balance sheets.
The inefficient loan recovery system then gives promoters tremendous power
over lenders. Not only can they play one lender off against another by
threatening to divert payments to the favoured bank, they can also refuse to pay
unless the lender brings in more money, especially if the lender fears the loan
becoming a Non-Performing Asset. Sometimes promoters can offer miserly onetime settlements (OTS) knowing that the system will ensure the banks have little
ability to collect even secured loans, and that too after years. Effectively, loans in
such a system become implicit equity, with a tough promoter enjoying the upside
in good times, and forcing banks to absorb losses in bad times, even while he
holds on to his equity.
CLEANING UP THE BANKS: PRINCIPLES
The world over, there are three cardinal rules when faced with incipient distress.
1) Viability does not depend on the debt outstanding, but on economic value.
Debt may have to be written down to correspond to what is viable.
Because of changed circumstances, demand may be lower and project cash
flows may be significantly lower than projected earlier. The project has
economic value when completed – in the sense that operating cash flows are
positive, but much less than the interest on the debt it carries. If the debt is not
written down, the project continues as an NPA, even while the promoter,
knowing it cannot repay, loses interest. If neglected, the project may stop
generating any cash flows and the assets may depreciate rapidly. Excessive
indebtedness can destroy value.
2) Complete projects that are viable, even if it requires additional funds infusion.
Stalled projects do not get any better over time. If there are small investments
needed to complete the project, and the promoter has no funds, it may still make
sense to lend to the project, even while writing down the overall debt.
Essentially, the new loan makes it possible to generate operating cash flows to
service some debt, even if not all the outstanding debt.
3) Don’t throw good money after bad money simply because there is an
unreliable promise that debt will become serviceable.
This is the opposite of (2). If the project is unviable, doubling its size does
not make it any more viable. Promoters that have over-borrowed often propose
an increase in scale so that the bank’s outstanding debt and new loans will all
become serviceable. Perhaps it would be better for the bank to write down its
loans to the initial project, rather than going deeper into the hole because the
promoter may incur new cost overruns as he expands. An incompetent or
unreliable promoter will remain so even when scale expands.
BANK MORAL HAZARD
Unfortunately, the incentives built into the public sector banking system have
made it more difficult for public sector bank executives to follow these
principles (I should add that some private sector bank executives have also not
been immune on occasion). The short tenure of managers means they are
unwilling to recognize losses immediately, and more willing to postpone them
into the future for their successors to deal with. Such distorted incentives lead to
overlending to or ‘ever-green’ unviable projects. Unfortunately, also, the taint of
NPA immediately makes them reluctant to lend to a project even if it is viable,
for fear that the investigative agencies will not buy their rationale for lending.
The absence of sound and well-documented loan evaluation and monitoring
practices by banks makes such an outcome more likely. So excessive lending to
bad projects and too little lending to viable ones can coexist.
THE REGULATOR’S DILEMMA
For the regulator who wants the banking system to clean up so it can start
lending again, this creates a variety of objectives, which can be somewhat
conflicting. First, we want banks to recognize loan distress and disclose it, not
paper over it by ever-greening unviable projects. Loan classification is merely
good accounting – it reflects what the true value of the loan might be. It is
accompanied by provisioning, which ensures the bank sets aside a buffer to
absorb likely losses. If the losses do not materialize, the bank can write back
provisioning to profits. If the losses do materialize, the bank does not have to
suddenly declare a big loss, it can set the losses against the prudential provisions
it has made. Thus the bank balance sheet then represents a true and fair picture
of the bank’s health, as a bank balance sheet is meant to.
Second, we want them to be realistic about the project’s cash generating
capacity, and structure lending and repayment to match that.
Third, we want them to continue lending to viable projects, even if they had
to be restructured in the past and are NPAs.
The problem is that any forbearance in labelling loans NPAs on restructuring
makes it easier to avoid disclosure and indulge in ever-greening. On the other
hand, strict disclosure and classification rules could imply a cessation of lending
to even viable projects. There are no clean solutions here given the kind of
incentives in the system, and given the absence of an operational bankruptcy
code in India. Therefore, the RBI has had to adopt a pragmatic approach to the
clean-up, creating new enabling processes.
THE RBI’S APPROACH
Our first task was to make sure that all banks had information on who had lent to
a borrower. So we created a large loan database (CRILC) that included all loans
over Rs 5 crores, which we shared with all the banks. The CRILC data included
the status of each loan – reflecting whether it was performing, already an NPA or
going towards NPA. That database allowed banks to identify early warning signs
of distress in a borrower such as habitual late payments to a segment of lenders.
The next step was to coordinate the lenders through a Joint Lenders’ Forum
(JLF) once such early signals were seen. The JLF was tasked with deciding on
an approach for resolution, much as a bankruptcy forum does. Incentives were
given to banks for reaching quick decisions. We have also tried to make the
forum more effective by reducing the need for everyone to agree, even while
giving those who are unconvinced by the joint decision the opportunity to exit.
We also wanted to stop restructuring of unviable projects by banks who want
to avoid recognizing losses – so we ended the ability of banks to restructure
projects without calling them NPA in April 2015. At the same time, a number of
long-duration projects such as roads had been structured with overly rapid
required repayments, even though cash flows continued to be available decades
from now. So we allowed such project payments to be restructured through the
5/25 scheme provided the long dated future cash flows could be reliably
established. Of course, there was always the possibility of banks using this
scheme to evergreen, so we have monitored how it works in practice, and
continue tweaking the scheme where necessary so that it achieves its objectives.
Because promoters were often unable to bring in new funds, and because the
judicial system often protects those with equity ownership, together with SEBI
we introduced the Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR) scheme so as to enable
banks to displace weak promoters by converting debt to equity. We did not want
banks to own projects indefinitely, so we indicated a timeline by which they had
to find a new promoter.
All these new tools (including some I do not have the space to describe)
effectively created a resolution system that replicated an out-of-court
bankruptcy. Banks now had the power to resolve distress, so we could push them
to exercise these powers by requiring recognition. This is what the Asset Quality
Review, completed in October 2015 and subsequently shared with banks, sought
to accomplish. Since then banks have classified existing distressed loans
appropriately, and since March 2016 are looking at their weak-but-not-yetdistressed portfolio for necessary actions. There is a change in culture, and banks
have been quite willing to get into the spirit of the AQR. Many have gone
significantly beyond our indications in what they have cleaned up by the quarter
ending March 2016. Of course, once the banks have properly classified a nonperforming loan and provisioned against it, their incentive to ever-green or avoid
writing down the debt to appropriate levels is diminished.
Nevertheless, clean-up is ongoing work. The SDR scheme dealt with weak
promoters. But some promoters are competent even while their projects are
overly indebted. The ‘Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets’
(S4A) is an optional framework for the resolution of large stressed accounts. The
S4A envisages determination of the sustainable debt level for a stressed
borrower, and bifurcation of the outstanding debt into sustainable debt and
equity/quasi-equity instruments which are expected to provide upside to the
lenders when the borrower turns around. Thus capable-but-over-indebted
promoters have some incentive to perform, and because the project is not
deemed an NPA if adequate provisions are made, public sector banks continue
lending to it if necessary.
Most recently, the government is contemplating a fund to lend into distressed
situations, with significant participation by third parties, so that new loans can be
made to viable distressed projects. Provided decision making is not dominated
by banks whose very loans are distressed, this could be an effective vehicle to
speed up resolution.
WHY SO MANY SCHEMES AND WHY THE CONSTANT TINKERING
The sources of borrower distress are many, and we have sought to provide
lenders with a menu of options to deal with it, even while limiting their
discretion to paper over the problem. Effectively the RBI has been trying to
create an entirely new bad loan resolution process in the absence of an effective
bankruptcy system. We have had to tinker, since each scheme’s effectiveness,
while seemingly obvious when designing, has to be monitored in light of the
distorted incentives in the system. As we learn, we have adapted regulation. Our
objective is not to be theoretical but to be pragmatic, even while subjecting the
system to increasing discipline and transparency.
The good news is that banks are getting into the spirit of the clean-up, and
pursuing reluctant promoters to take the necessary steps to rehabilitate projects.
Indebted promoters are being forced to sell assets to repay lenders. We will
shortly license a number of new Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) to
provide a deeper market for stressed assets. We are also working on a framework
to enhance efficiency and transparency of price discovery in sale of stressed
assets by banks to ARCs. Bank investors, after initially getting alarmed by the
size of the disclosures, have bid up PSB bank shares. To the extent that these are
still trading at a fraction of book value, there is still room for upward valuation if
the banks can improve the prospects of recovery. The new schemes, as well as
the improving economy, should help.
FRAUD AND WILFUL DEFAULT
Even while we make it easier for committed promoters to restructure when they
experience bad luck or unforeseen problems, we should reduce the ability of the
fraudster or the wilful defaulter, who can pay but simply is disinclined to do so,
or the fraudster, to get away. This is why it is extremely important that banks do
not use the new flexible schemes for promoters who habitually misuse the
system (everyone knows who these are) or for fraudsters. The threat of labelling
a promoter a wilful defaulter could be effective in the former case, and we have
coordinated with SEBI to increase penalties for wilful defaulters. For fraudsters,
quick and effective investigation by the investigative agencies is extremely
important. We should send the message that no one can get away, and I am glad
that the Prime Minister’s Office is pushing prosecution of large frauds. The RBI
has set up a fraud monitoring cell to coordinate the early reporting of fraud cases
to the investigative agencies. And for those who have diverted money out of
their companies, especially into highly visible assets abroad, a stern message
sent by bankers sitting together with investigative agencies should help send the
message that the alternatives to repayment can be harsh.
BANK RISK AVERSION
Bankers often argue that the easiest people to label in a fraud are the bankers
themselves, who often could be victims rather than perpetrators. Similarly, they
accuse the vigilance authorities of excessive zeal when loans go bad, of
immediately suspecting bankers of malfeasance when the bad loan could be an
unintended consequence of sensible risk taking. Unfortunately, all too often,
such investigations also uncover sloppy due diligence or loan monitoring by
bankers. After the fact, it is hard to distinguish sensible risk taking from
carelessness or from corruption. While the vigilance authorities continuously
attempt to reassure bankers that they are not vigilantes, the bankers themselves
know that their own enthusiasm and deficiencies can expose them to
unwarranted accusations of corruption.
Certainly, part of the solution is for bankers to pull up their socks. But
another part of the solution is to not label a banker based on the outcome of a
single loan but instead look for a pattern across loans. A banker who makes an
excessive number of bad loans compared to his cohort deserves, at the very least,
to be questioned. But the banker who makes the occasional bad loan amidst a lot
of good ones probably needs to be rewarded. Such pattern-based monitoring by
bank authorities, with serious punishment through vigilance action only if there
is evidence of money changing hands, could control malfeasance while
rewarding risk taking. This does require some changes in the current system,
including de-emphasizing the committee-based approach to loan approval in
banks, which appears to diffuse responsibility for loan decisions.
WHAT RESPONSIBILITY DOES THE RBI HAVE?
Bankers sometimes turn around and accuse regulators of creating the bad loan
problem. The truth is bankers, promoters, and circumstances create the bad loan
problem. The regulator cannot substitute for the banker’s commercial decisions
or micromanage them or even investigate them when they are being made.
Instead, in most situations, the regulator can at best warn about poor lending
practices when they are being undertaken, and demand banks hold adequate risk
buffers. The important duty of the regulator is to force timely recognition of
NPAs and their disclosure when they happen. Forbearance may be a reasonable
but risky regulatory strategy when there is some hope that growth will pick up
soon and the system will recover on its own. Everyone – banker, promoter,
investors, and government officials – often urge such a strategy because it kicks
the problem down the road, hopefully for someone else to deal with. The
downside is that when growth does not pick up, the bad loan problem is bigger,
and dealing with it is more difficult. It is when the bad loan problem is allowed
to accumulate through forbearance or non-recognition that regulators have the
difficult task of bringing the system back on track. That is the problem we have
had to deal with at the RBI.
As I have shown you, the consequence since early 2014 of the past build-up
of stressed loans was a slowdown in public sector bank lending in certain
sectors. The cessation of RBI forbearance and the Asset Quality Review in mid
2015 were therefore not responsible for the slowdown. Instead, high distressed
exposures in certain sectors were already occupying PSB management attention
and holding them back. The only way for them to supply the economy’s need for
credit, which is essential for higher economic growth, was to clean up and
recapitalize.
The silver lining message in the slower credit growth is that banks have not
been lending indiscriminately in an attempt to reduce the size of stressed assets
in an expanded overall balance sheet, and this bodes well for future slippages. In
sum, to the question of what comes first, clean-up or growth, I think the answer
is unambiguously ‘Clean-up!’ Indeed, this is the lesson from every other country
that has faced financial stress. It is important, therefore, that the clean-up
proceeds to its conclusion, without any resort to regulatory forbearance once
again.
Sometimes, easier monetary policy is proposed as an answer to reducing the
bad debt problem. For the heavily indebted promoter, however, easier monetary
policy will typically bring no relief. Even with lower policy rates, the bank,
which is typically not made whole even if it grabs all the borrower’s cash flows,
has no incentive to reduce the interest rate the borrower can pay. And few banks
are competing for that borrower’s business, so there is no competition to force
down loan rates. The bottom line is that easier monetary policy is no answer to
serious distress, contrary to widespread belief.
WHAT CAN THE GOVERNMENT DO?
The government is in the process of speeding up the debt recovery process, and
creating a new bankruptcy system. These are important steps to improve the
resolution process. In the near term, however, two actions will pay large
dividends.
The first is to improve the governance of public sector banks so that we are
not faced with this situation again. The government, through the Indradhanush
initiative, has sent a clear signal that it wants to make sure that public sector
banks, once healthy, stay healthy. Breaking up the post of Chairman and
Managing Director, strengthening board and management appointments through
the Banks Board Bureau, decentralizing more decisions to the professional
board, finding ways to incentivize management, all these will help improve loan
evaluation, monitoring and repayment.
The second is to infuse bank capital, with some of the infusion related to
stronger performance, so that better banks have more room to grow. Capital
infusion into weak banks should ideally accompany an improvement in
governance, but given the need for absorbing the losses associated with balance
sheet clean-up, better that government capital be infused quickly. Governments
are sometimes reluctant to infuse bank capital because there are so many more
pressing demands for funds. Yet, there are few higher return activities than
capitalizing the public sector banks so that they can support credit growth.
Finally, the Economic Survey has suggested the RBI should capitalize public
sector banks. This seems a non-transparent way of proceeding, getting the
banking regulator once again into the business of owning banks, with attendant
conflicts of interest.
Better that the RBI pay the government the maximum dividend that it can,
retaining just enough surplus buffers that are consistent with good central bank
risk-management practice. Indeed, this is what we do, and in the last three years,
we have paid all our surplus to the government. Separately, the government can
infuse capital into the banks. The two decisions need not be linked.
Alternatively, a less effective form of capital, if the government cannot buy bank
equity directly with cash, is for it to issue the banks ‘Government Capitalization
Bonds’ in exchange for equity. The banks would hold the bonds on their balance
sheet. This would tie up part of their balance sheet, but would certainly be
capital.
Postscript: I would not change anything in this speech today. The need for action on everyone’s part is
as urgent as ever, though the instruments to effect that action have grown. The NDA government
amended the various acts governing debt recovery to make them less easy to game, and also enacted a
new bankruptcy code. Further, it amended the working of debt recovery tribunals. These are important
steps forward in rectifying the balance between borrower and lender in India. However, the operational
effectiveness of these changes needs to be tracked, and further amendments enacted if necessary, until
we have a resolution system that works in a rapid, fair and transparent way.
CHAPTER 7
THE ECONOMY AND OTHER ISSUES
I
The Governor of the Reserve Bank is much more than just a regulator or a central banker. Since the
RBI is both the lender of last resort, as well as the custodian of the country’s foreign exchange
reserves, the Governor is the primary manager of macroeconomic risk in the country. If the Governor
takes this role seriously, he (or she) has to warn when he fears the economy is in danger of going down
the wrong path. As an apolitical technocrat, he can neither be a cheerleader for the government, nor
can he be an unconstrained critic. This is a fine line to tread, and the Governor has to pick both the
issues he speaks on, as well as the tone of his commentary, very carefully.
The mistake on all sides is to treat the RBI Governor as just another bureaucrat. If the Governor
takes this mistaken view, he ends up being subservient to the central and state governments, and not
offering an independent technocratic perspective that could keep the nation from straying into
economic distress. The RBI Governor has to understand his role, and know it occasionally entails
warning of macroeconomic risks from government actions or saying ‘No!’ firmly.
Every government tests what the RBI Governor will acquiesce to, and ideally, it will not push
beyond a point, knowing that the RBI’s cautions are worth heeding. If the government takes the
mistaken view that the RBI Governor is just another bureaucrat, it will be displeased when it sees the
Governor deviating from the usually deferential behaviour of bureaucrats, and it will strive to cut him
down to size. This does not serve the country either.
I was determined not to neglect my responsibilities as national risk manager, even while trying to
explain to the government of the day why this was a necessary role. Where I had direct responsibility,
this meant saying no in private occasionally, even while offering safer alternatives for what the
government intended. Where I had indirect responsibility, this meant advising or counselling in
private, and occasionally, when the issue merited a national debate, speaking in public. Of course, my
past experience as Chief Economist of the International Monetary Fund, where my job was to identify
macroeconomic risks across a variety of countries, gave me a unique cross-country perspective, and
heightened my sense of responsibility.
I also felt this responsibility from a different source. Because of the relentless press attention, I
realized that many young people who were looking for a role model now saw the Governor of the
Reserve Bank as one they wanted to learn from and imitate. I felt I had to display the highest
professional integrity, over and above the obviously necessary personal integrity, if I were to discharge
my responsibility to these youth.
I
While the Governor has to warn about risks where necessary, he is not an agent for the opposition.
He continues to be an essential part of the country’s administration, and his objectives have to be the
broader government objectives of sustainable growth and development. The danger in a country that is
unused to legitimate words of caution, and a press that is accustomed to deference from bureaucrats, is
that it may misinterpret this role. A new narrative may form around the Governor. He can come to be
seen by the press and social media as a critic, and every speech or comment of his is then scrutinized
for evidence that supports the narrative. Should the Governor disappear from public view and not
speak for fear of misinterpretation, or should he take the risk in order to discharge his responsibilities?
I chose the latter, in part because I thought it was extremely important that our country should steer a
stable path when surrounded by so much global risk, and in part because I thought young people
(including my own younger staff at the RBI) should realize that it is important to speak up when one’s
responsibilities demand it. I did, however, meet regularly with the government to share my views and
listen to its point of view, and always left feeling that there was mutual understanding.
Given my risk manager’s perspective, and given that we were recovering from the currency
turmoil, in my first speech on the economy I tried to talk up what was going on in India. However, I
also had to respect the dharma of the central banker, and not indulge in excessive hype. Indeed, this
swing from excessive euphoria to excessive pessimism and back was the subject of my speech at
Harvard Business School in October 2013.
Filtering Out the Real India
ndian cricket fans are manic-depressive in their treatment of their favourite
teams. They elevate players to god-like status when their team performs well,
ignoring obvious weaknesses; but when it loses, as any team must, the fall is
equally steep and every weakness is dissected. In fact, the team is never as good
as fans make it out to be when it wins, nor as bad as it is made out to be when it
loses. Its weaknesses existed in victory, too, but were overlooked.
Such bipolar behaviour seems to apply to assessments of India’s economy as
well, with foreign analysts joining Indians in similar swings between overexuberance and self-flagellation. A few years ago, India could do no wrong.
Commentators talked of ‘Chindia’, elevating India’s performance to that of its
northern neighbour. Today, India can do no right.
India does have its problems. Annual GDP growth slowed significantly in the
last quarter to 4.4 per cent, inflation is high, and the current account and budget
deficits last year were too large. Every commentator today highlights India’s
poor infrastructure, excessive regulation, small manufacturing sector, and a
workforce with inadequate education and skills.
These are indeed deficiencies, and they must be fixed if India is to grow
strongly and stably. But the same deficiencies existed when India was growing
fast. To understand what needs to be done in the short run, we must understand
what dampened the Indian success story.
In part, India’s slowdown paradoxically reflects the substantial fiscal and
monetary stimulus that its policy makers, like those in all major emerging
markets, injected into its economy in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis.
The resulting growth spurt led to inflation, especially because the world did not
slide into a second Great Depression, as was originally feared. So monetary
policy has had to be tight, with high interest rates contributing to slowing
investment and consumption.
Moreover, India’s institutions for acquiring land, allocating natural resources,
and granting clearances were overwhelmed during the period of strong growth.
Strong growth increased the scarcity and value of resources such as land or
mineral wealth. To the extent that these were cheap in the past, there was little
reward to misallocating them. Growth, however, increased the rents to
corruption.
Similarly, industrial development led to growing encroachment on farmland
and forests and the displacement of farmers and tribals. India is a developing
country with a civil society possessed of first-world sensibilities. Protests
organized by politicians and activists led to new environmental laws and land
acquisition laws that aim to make development sustainable. Over time, India will
learn to streamline the new laws to make them more functional, but in the short
run a side effect has been more bureaucratic impediments to investment. So
growth, as well as the reaction to that unbridled growth, created a greater
possibility of corruption.
Fortunately, a vibrant democracy like India has its own checks and balances.
India’s investigative agencies, judiciary, and press started examining allegations
of large-scale corruption. The unfortunate side effect as the clean-up proceeded
was that bureaucratic decision making became more risk averse, and many large
projects came to a grinding halt.
Only now, as the government creates new institutions to accelerate decision
making and implement transparent processes, are these projects being cleared to
proceed. Once restarted, it will take time for these projects to be completed, at
which point output growth will increase significantly.
The combination of excessive (with the benefit of hindsight) post-crisis
stimulus and stalling large projects had other consequences such as high internal
and external deficits. The post-crisis fiscal-stimulus packages sent the
government budget deficit soaring from what had been a very responsible level
in 2007-08 of around 2.5 per cent to over 6 per cent. Similarly, as large mining
projects stalled, India had to resort to higher imports of coal and scrap iron,
while its exports of iron ore dwindled.
An increase in gold imports placed further pressure on the current account
balance. Newly rich consumers in rural areas increasingly put their savings in
gold, a familiar store of value, while wealthy urban consumers, worried about
inflation, also turned to buying gold. Ironically, had they bought Apple shares,
rather than a commodity (no matter how fungible, liquid, and investible it is),
their purchases would have been treated as a foreign investment rather than as
adding to the external deficit.
For the most part, India’s current growth slowdown and its fiscal and current
account deficits are not structural problems. They are all fixable by means of
modest reforms. This is not to say that ambitious reform is not good, or is not
warranted to sustain growth for the next decade. But India does not need to
become a manufacturing giant overnight to fix its current problems.
The immediate tasks are more mundane, but also more feasible ones: clearing
projects, reducing poorly targeted subsidies, and finding more ways to narrow
the current account deficit and ease its financing. Over the last year, the
government has been pursuing this agenda, which is already showing some early
results. For example, the external deficit is narrowing sharply on the back of
higher exports and lower imports. The government and the Reserve Bank said it
would be $70 billion this fiscal year, down from $88 billion last fiscal year, but
recent data suggests it could be lower still.
This leads me to another point. Because analysts keep looking for major
structural reforms to fix the deeper economic challenges, they ignore smaller
steps or dismiss them as ‘band aids’. But strategically placed small steps –
strategic incrementalism for want of a better term – taken together can deal with
the immediate problems, thus buying time and economic and political space for
the major structural reforms.
Put differently, when the Indian authorities said they would bring the fiscal
deficit below 5.3 per cent last year, no one believed them. The final outturn was
4.9 per cent. Similarly, while we project the CAD to come down to 3.7 per cent
this year, I think we could be pleasantly surprised. Not all the actions we have
taken are pretty, and not all are sustainable, but they have done the job.
Indeed, despite its shortcomings, India’s GDP will probably grow by 5-5.5
per cent this year – not great, but certainly not bad for what is likely to be a low
point in economic performance. The monsoon has been good and will spur
consumption, especially in rural areas, which are already growing strongly,
owing to improvements in road transport and communications connectivity.
The banking sector has undoubtedly experienced an increase in bad loans,
often owing to investment projects that are not unviable but only delayed. As
these projects come onstream, they will generate the revenue needed to repay
loans. India’s banks have the capital to absorb losses in the meantime.
Likewise, India’s finances are stronger than in the typical emerging-market
country, let alone an emerging-market country in crisis. India’s overall public
debt/GDP ratio has been on a declining trend, from 73.2 per cent in 2006-07 to
66 per cent in 2012-13 (and the central government’s debt/GDP ratio is only 46
per cent). Moreover, the debt is denominated in rupees and has an average
maturity of more than nine years.
India’s external debt burden is even more favourable, at only 21.2 per cent of
GDP (much of it owed by the private sector), while short-term external debt is
only 5.2 per cent of GDP. India’s foreign-exchange reserves stand at $278 billion
(about 15 per cent of GDP), enough to finance the entire current account deficit
for several years. Even if you count all of trade credit as well as maturing
deposits held by overseas Indians as short-term debt, India’s reserves can pay
them all down and still have money left over.
That said, India can do better – much better. The path to a more open,
competitive, efficient, and humane economy will surely be bumpy in the years to
come. But, in the short term, there is much low-hanging fruit to be plucked.
For instance, we are committed to developing our financial system, and
carefully expanding access to finance can be a source of tremendous growth in
the years to come. We are also embarked on large infrastructure projects. For
example, the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor, a project with Japanese
collaboration entailing over $90 billion in investment, will link Delhi to
Mumbai’s ports, covering an overall length of 1,483 km and passing through six
states. This project will have nine mega industrial zones of about 200-250 sq.
km., high speed freight lines, three ports, six airports, a six-lane intersection-free
expressway connecting the country’s political and financial capitals, and a 4,000
MW power plant. We have already seen a significant boost to economic activity
as India built out the Golden Quadrilateral highway system, the boost from the
Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor can only be imagined. The best of India is yet
to come.
Back to the cricketing analogy, India is an open argumentative society. But
we are prone to mood swings, perhaps more so than other societies, perhaps in
part driven by our excitable, competitive and very young press. Stripping out
both the euphoria and the despair from what is said about India – and from what
we Indians say about ourselves – will probably bring us closer to the truth.
L
II
We were impartial in advising all governments about the virtues of macroeconomic stability. In the
Gadgil Lecture given on 13 February 2014, I gave the UPA government, which was going to present its
last budget, the usual RBI caution on maintaining fiscal discipline, including urging it to address the
vexing issue of oil subsidies. I offered similar advice to the NDA government also.
Macroeconomic Advice
et me offer a quick recap of the macroeconomic situation. Growth is
stabilizing on the back of a good harvest, strengthening exports, and some
early signs of resumption of large stalled projects. However, growth is still very
weak. We have to work to ensure macroeconomic stability, which means
strengthening growth, especially through investment, maintaining a moderate
current account deficit, achieving a fiscal deficit consistent with the
government’s fiscal roadmap, and reducing inflation. The government has to be
commended for its efforts to revive growth, narrow the current account deficit,
and meet fiscal targets. I have no doubt that the fiscal deficit for 2013-14 will be
close to, or below, the finance minister’s red line.
Going forward, however, we need to continue on the path of fiscal
consolidation constantly improving the sustainability and quality of fiscal
adjustment. It is very important that we spend money on needed public
investment, even while reducing misdirected subsidies and entitlements.
Good fiscal control will help us in our fight against inflation. So will
moderation in agricultural support price inflation, which will ensure that these
prices only provide a baseline level of support when the farmer is in difficulty,
without displacing market prices. Accurate market prices, together with good
dissemination of data on sowing patterns, can do a far better job than support
prices in directing agricultural production to where it is most valuable and
needed.
Somewhat paradoxically, raising energy prices to market levels will also lead
to lower inflation over the medium term, the horizon over which the RBI is
trying to contain inflation. The reason is that higher prices will reduce excessive
consumption, reduce subsidies and fiscal deficits, and incentivize investment and
competition, even while allowing prices to be determined by an increasingly
stable and plentifully supplied global market for energy. The consequences of
inappropriate or inadequate price adjustments will be that the Reserve Bank will
have to bear more of the burden in combating inflation.
W
III
I received numerous invitations to speak, the majority of which I turned down. But I could not turn
down every request, and gave a speech on average once a month – later I realized this was not different
from the frequency with which the Fed Chairman spoke in public. In India, however, the 24x7
channels, hungry for news, ensured that no speech went uncovered, no matter how minor the occasion
or remote the location. Given press presence, I could not repeat speeches (the less there was a new
message to report, the more likely the press might ‘make’ news by latching on to something
peripheral), nor could I speak on monetary policy or financial sector reforms in every speech. What
better way to speak on something different than to go back to my research on the political economy of
reforms and growth, especially if it could contribute to the public debate as well as the RBI’s mission?
In the Lalit Doshi Memorial Lecture in August 2014, I linked the environment we lived in in India to
the need for furthering our efforts on financial inclusion.
Finance and Opportunity in India
e are approaching the 67th anniversary of our Independence. Sixty-seven
years is a long time in the life of man – indeed, it is about the average
Indian’s life expectancy today. Since life expectancy was shorter at the time of
Independence, it is safe to say that most Indians born just after Independence are
now no more. It is useful to take stock at such a time. Did we achieve the dreams
of our founding fathers for freedom’s first children? Or have we fallen woefully
short? What more do we need to do?
Clearly, our founding fathers wanted political freedom for the people of India
– freedom to determine who we would be governed by, as well as freedom of
thought, expression, belief, faith, and worship. They wanted justice and equality,
of status and opportunity. And they wanted us to be free from poverty.
We have made substantial progress in achieving political freedom. Our
democracy has matured, with people confidently choosing to vote out
governments that lose touch with their needs. Our institutions protecting the
freedom to vote have grown stronger, with the Election Commission and the
forces of law and order ensuring free and largely fair elections throughout the
country. Political parties, NGOs, the press, and individuals exert checks and
balances on public policy. And the judiciary has taken important steps to protect
individual freedom.
Our economy is also far richer than it was at the time of independence and
poverty has come down substantially. Of course, some countries like South
Korea that were in a similar situation then are far better off today but many
others have done far worse. Indeed, one of the advantages of a vibrant
democracy is that it gives people an eject button which prevents governance
from getting too bad. Democracy has probably ensured more stable and
equitable economic growth than an authoritarian regime might have.
Yet a dispassionate view of both our democracy and our economy would
suggest some concerns. Even as our democracy and our economy have become
more vibrant, an important issue in the recent election was whether we had
substituted the crony socialism of the past with crony capitalism, where the rich
and the influential are alleged to have received land, natural resources and
spectrum in return for payoffs to venal politicians. By killing transparency and
competition, crony capitalism is harmful to free enterprise, opportunity, and
economic growth. And by substituting special interests for the public interest, it
is harmful to democratic expression. If there is some truth to these perceptions of
crony capitalism, a natural question is why people tolerate it. Why do they vote
for the venal politician who perpetuates it?
A HYPOTHESIS ON THE PERSISTENCE OF CRONY CAPITALISM
One widely held hypothesis is that our country suffers from want of a ‘few good
men’ in politics. This view is unfair to the many upstanding people in politics.
But even assuming it is true, every so often we see the emergence of a group,
usually upper-middle-class professionals, who want to clean up politics. But
when these ‘good’ people stand for election, they tend to lose their deposits.
Does the electorate really not want squeaky clean government?
Apart from the conceit that high morals lie only with the upper middle class,
the error in this hypothesis may be in believing that problems stem from
individual ethics rather than the system we have. In a speech I made before the
Bombay Chamber of Commerce in 2008, I argued that the tolerance for the
venal politician is because he is the crutch that helps the poor and
underprivileged navigate a system that gives them so little access (this idea was
inspired by Richard Hofstadter’s seminal book The Age of Reform).
Let me explain. Our provision of public goods is unfortunately biased against
access by the poor. In a number of states, ration shops do not supply what is due,
even if one has a ration card – and too many amongst the poor do not have a
ration card or a Below Poverty Line card; teachers do not show up at schools to
teach; the police do not register crimes, or encroachments, especially if
committed by the rich and powerful; public hospitals are not adequately staffed
and ostensibly free medicines are not available at the dispensary; … I can go on,
but you know the all-too-familiar picture.
This is where the crooked but savvy politician fits in. While the poor do not
have the money to ‘purchase’ public services that are their right, they have a vote
that the politician wants. The politician does a little bit to make life a little more
tolerable for his poor constituents – a government job here, an FIR registered
there, a land right honoured somewhere else. For this, he gets the gratitude of his
voters, and more important, their vote.
Of course, there are many politicians who are honest and genuinely want to
improve the lot of their voters. But perhaps the system tolerates corruption
because the street-smart politician is better at making the wheels of the
bureaucracy creak, however slowly, in favour of his constituents. And such a
system is self-sustaining. An idealist who is unwilling to ‘work’ the system can
promise to reform it, but the voters know there is little one person can do.
Moreover, who will provide the patronage while the idealist is fighting the
system? So why not stay with the fixer you know even if it means the reformist
loses his deposit?
So the circle is complete. The poor and the underprivileged need the
politician to help them get jobs and public services. The crooked politician needs
the businessman to provide the funds that allow him to supply patronage to the
poor and fight elections. The corrupt businessman needs the crooked politician
to get public resources and contracts cheaply. And the politician needs the votes
of the poor and the underprivileged. Every constituency is tied to the other in a
cycle of dependence, which ensures that the status quo prevails.
Well-meaning political leaders and governments have tried, and are trying, to
break this vicious cycle. How do we get more politicians to move from ‘fixing’
the system to reforming the system? The obvious answer is to either improve the
quality of public services or reduce the public’s dependence on them. Both
approaches are necessary.
But then how does one improve the quality of public services? The typical
answer has been to increase the resources devoted to the service, and to change
how it is managed. A number of worthwhile efforts are under way to improve the
quality of public education and health care. But if resources leak or public
servants are not motivated, which is likely in the worst-governed states, these
interventions are not very effective.
Some have argued that making a public service a right can change delivery. It
is hard to imagine that simply legislating rights and creating a public expectation
of delivery will, in fact, ensure delivery. After all, is there not an expectation that
a ration card holder will get decent grain from the fair price shop, yet all too
frequently grain is not available or is of poor quality.
Information decentralization can help. Knowing how many medicines the
local public dispensary received, or how much money the local school is getting
for mid-day meals, can help the public monitor delivery and alert higher-ups
when the benefits are not delivered. But the public delivery system is usually
most apathetic where the public is poorly educated, of low social status, and
disorganized, so monitoring by the poor is also unlikely to be effective.
Some argue that this is why the middle class should enjoy public benefits
along with the poor, so that the former can protest against poor delivery, which
will ensure high quality for all. But making benefits universal is costly, and may
still lead to indifferent delivery for the poor. The middle class may live in
different areas from the poor. Indeed, even when located in the same area, the
poor may not even patronize facilities frequented by the middle class because
they feel out of place. And even when all patronize the same facility, providers
may still be able to discriminate between the voluble middle class and the
uncomplaining poor.
So if more resources or better management are inadequate answers, what
might work? The answer may partly lie in reducing the public’s dependence on
government-provided jobs or public services. A good private sector job, for
example, may give a household the money to get private health care, education,
and supplies, and reduce their need for public services. Income could increase an
individual’s status and increase the respect they are accorded by the teacher, the
policeman or the bureaucrat.
But how does a poor man get a good job if he has not benefited from good
health care and education in the first place? In this modern world where good
skills are critical to a good job, the unskilled have little recourse but to take a
poorly paying job or to look for the patronage that will get them a good job. So
do we not arrive at a contradiction: the good delivery of public services is
essential to escape the dependence on bad public services?
MONEY LIBERATES AND EMPOWERS…
We need to go back to the drawing board. There is a way out of this
contradiction, developing the idea that money liberates. Could we not give poor
households cash instead of promising them public services? A poor household
with cash can patronize whomsoever it wants, and not just the monopolistic
government provider. Because the poor can pay for their medicines or their food,
they will command respect from the private provider. Not only will a corrupt fair
price shop owner not be able to divert the grain he gets since he has to sell at
market price, but because he has to compete with the shop across the street, he
cannot afford to be surly or lazy. The government can add to the effects of
empowering the poor by instilling a genuine cost to being uncompetitive – by
shutting down parts of the public delivery systems that do not generate enough
custom.
Much of what we need to do is already possible. The government intends to
announce a scheme for full financial inclusion on Independence Day. It includes
identifying the poor, creating unique biometric identifiers for them, opening
linked bank accounts, and making government transfers into those accounts.
When fully rolled out, I believe it will give the poor the choice and respect as
well as the services they had to beg for in the past. It can break a link between
poor public service, patronage, and corruption that is growing more worrisome
over time.
Undoubtedly, cash transfers will not resolve every problem, nor are they
uncontroversial. A constant refrain from paternalistic social workers is that the
poor will simply drink away any transfers. In fact, studies by NGOs like Self
Employed Women’s Association indicate this is not true. Moreover, one could
experiment with sending transfers to women, who may be better spenders. Some
argue that attaching conditions to cash transfers – for example, they will be made
provided the recipient’s children attend school regularly – may improve the
usage of the cash. The danger of attaching conditionality is that if the monitor is
corrupt or inefficient, the whole process of direct benefits transfers can be
vitiated. Nevertheless, it will be useful to monitor usage carefully where
automation is possible, and automatically attach further benefits to responsible
usage.
A related concern is whether cash transfers will become addictive – whether
they become millstones keeping the poor in poverty rather than stepping stones
out of it. This is an important concern. Cash transfers work best when they build
capabilities through education and health care, thus expanding opportunity,
rather than when they are used solely for inessential consumption. The vast
majority amongst the poor will seize opportunities, especially for their children,
with both hands. Nevertheless, if there is evidence that cash transfers are being
misspent – and we should let data rather than preconceived notions drive policy
– some portion could be given in the form of electronic coupons that can be
spent by the specified recipient only on food, education or health care.
Eventually, we will have to find a way to wean those who start earning
significant amounts from receiving such transfers. How to do this without
providing disincentives to working and earning is a future problem born of
success which is best left for another day. The United States has dealt with the
disincentive effects of getting off welfare with programmes like the earned
income tax credit.
Another set of concerns has to do with whether private providers will bother
to provide services in remote areas. Clearly, if people in remote areas have the
cash to buy, private providers will find their way there. Indeed, a particularly
desirable outcome will be if some of the poor find work providing services that
hitherto used to be provided by public servants. Moreover, implementing cash
transfers does not mean dismantling the system of public delivery wherever it is
effective – it only means that the poor will pay when they use the public service.
The broader takeaway is that financial inclusion and direct benefits transfer
can be a way of liberating the poor from dependency on indifferently delivered
public services, and thus indirectly from the venal but effective politician. It is
not a cure-all but will help the poor out of poverty and towards true political
independence. But financial inclusion can do more; by liberating the poor and
the marginalized from the clutches of the moneylender, by providing credit and
advice to the entrepreneurial amongst the poor, and by giving households the
ability to save and insure against accidents, it can set them on the road to
economic independence, thus strengthening the political freedom that good
public services will bring. This is why financial inclusion is so important.
FIVE Ps OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION
Let me end with a vision of how the RBI can speed up and enhance financial
inclusion of the kind I have just outlined. Financial inclusion in my view is about
getting five things right: Product, Place, Price, Protection, and Profit.
If we are to draw in the poor, we need Products that address their needs; a
safe place to save, a reliable way to send and receive money, a quick way to
borrow in times of need or to escape the clutches of the moneylender, easy-tounderstand accident, life and health insurance, and an avenue to engage in saving
for old age. Simplicity and reliability are key – what one thinks one is paying for
is what one should get, without hidden clauses or opt-outs to trip one up. The
RBI is going to nudge banks to offer a basic suite of Products to address
financial needs.
Two other attributes of Products are very important. They should be easy to
access at low transactions cost. In the past, this meant that the Place of delivery,
that is the bank branch, had to be close to the customer. So a key element of the
inclusion programmes was to expand bank branching in unbanked areas. Today,
with various other means of reaching the customer such as the mobile phone or
the business correspondent, we can be more agnostic about the means by which
the customer is reached. In other words, ‘Place’ today need not mean physical
proximity, it can mean electronic proximity, or proximity via correspondents.
Towards this end, we have liberalized the regulations on bank business
correspondents, encouraged banks and mobile companies to form alliances, and
started the process of licensing payment banks.
The transactions costs of obtaining the Product, including the Price the
intermediary charges, should be low. Since every unbanked individual likely
consumes low volumes of financial services to begin with, the provider should
automate transactions as far as possible to reduce costs, and use employees that
are local and are commensurately paid. Furthermore, any regulatory burden
should be minimal. With these objectives in mind, the RBI has started the
process of licensing small local banks, and is re-examining KYC norms with a
view to simplifying them. Last month, we removed a major hurdle in the way of
migrant workers and people living in makeshift structures obtaining a bank
account, that of providing proof of current address.
New and inexperienced customers will require Protection. The RBI is
beefing up the Consumer Protection Code, emphasizing the need for suitable
products that are simple and easy to understand. We are also working with the
government on expanding financial literacy. Teaching the poor the intricacies of
finance has to move beyond literacy camps and into schools. Banks that lend to
the entrepreneurial poor should find ways to advise them on business
management too, or find ways to engage NGOs and organizations like
NABARD in the process. We are also strengthening the customer grievanceredressal mechanism, while looking to expand supervision, market intelligence,
and coordination with law and order to reduce the proliferation of fly-by-night
operators.
Finally, while mandated targets are useful in indicating ambition (and
allowing banks to anticipate a large enough scale so as to make investments),
financial inclusion cannot be achieved without it being Profitable. So the last P is
that there should be profits at the bottom of the pyramid. For instance, the
government should be willing to pay reasonable commissions punctually for
benefits transfers, and bankers should be able to charge reasonable and
transparent fees or interest rates for offering services to the poor.
Let me conclude. One of the greatest dangers to the growth of developing
countries is the middle income trap, where crony capitalism creates oligarchies
that slow down growth. If the debate during the elections is any pointer, this is a
very real concern of the public in India today. To avoid this trap, and to
strengthen the independent democracy our leaders won for us sixty-seven years
ago, we have to improve public services, especially those targeted at the poor. A
key mechanism to improve these services is through financial inclusion, which is
going to be an important part of the government and the RBI’s plans in the
coming years. I hope many of you in this audience will join in ensuring we are
successful. Thank you.
T
IV
I was invited by the Chief Minister of Goa to speak at the D.D. Kosambi Ideas Festival in Goa on 20
February 2015. Since this was an ‘Ideas’ festival in honour of the great polymath, I reached into my
research interests and a broader analysis of political economy to, once again, make the case for
financial inclusion.
Democracy, Inclusion, and Prosperity
hank you for inviting me to this Festival of Ideas. Since this festival is about
ideas, I am not going to tax you with the Reserve Bank’s views on monetary
policy, which are, by now, well known. Instead, I want to talk about something I
have been studying for many years, the development of a liberal market
democracy. In doing this, I will wear my hat as a professor in the field known as
political economy, and discard my RBI hat for the time being. If you came here
expecting more insights on the path of interest rates, as I expect many of you
did, let me apologize for disappointing you.
My starting point is the truism that people want to live in a safe prosperous
country where they enjoy freedom of thought and action, and where they can
exercise their democratic rights to choose their government. But how do
countries ensure political freedom and economic prosperity? Why do the two
seem to go together? And what more, if anything, does India have to do to
ensure it has these necessary underpinnings for prosperity and continued
political freedom? These are enormously important questions, but given their
nature, they will not be settled in one speech. Think of my talk today, therefore,
as a contribution to the debate.
FUKUYAMA’S THREE PILLARS OF A LIBERAL DEMOCRATIC STATE
In his magisterial two-volume analysis of the emergence of political systems
around the world (The Origins of Political Order: From Pre-Human Times to the
French Revolution, 2011; and Political Order and Political Decay: From the
Industrial Revolution to the Globalization of Democracy, 2014), political
scientist Francis Fukuyama builds on the work of his mentor, Samuel Huntington
(Political Order in Changing Societies, 1968), to argue that liberal democracies,
which seem to be best at fostering political freedoms and economic success, tend
to have three important pillars: a strong government, rule of law, and democratic
accountability. I propose in this talk to start by summarizing my (necessarily
imprecise) reading of Fukuyama’s ideas to you. I would urge you to read the
books to get their full richness. I will then go on to argue that he leaves out a
fourth pillar, free markets, which are essential to make the liberal democracy
prosperous. I will warn that these pillars are weakening in industrial countries
because of rising inequality of opportunity, and end with lessons for India.
Consider Fukuyama’s three pillars in greater detail. Strong government does
not mean one that is only militarily powerful or uses its intelligence apparatus to
sniff out enemies of the state. Instead, a strong government is also one that
provides an effective and fair administration through clean, motivated, and
competent administrators who can deliver good governance.
Rule of law means that government’s actions are constrained by what we
Indians would term dharma – by a historical and widely understood code of
moral and righteous behaviour, enforced by religious, cultural, or judicial
authority.
And democratic accountability means that the government has to be
popularly accepted, with the people having the right to throw unpopular, corrupt,
or incompetent rulers out.
Fukuyama makes a more insightful point than simply that all three traditional
aspects of the state – executive, judiciary, and legislature – are needed to balance
one another. In sharp contrast to the radical libertarian view that the best
government is the minimal ‘night watchman’, which primarily protects life and
property rights while enforcing contracts, or the radical Marxist view that the
need for the government disappears as class conflict ends, Fukuyama, as did
Huntington, emphasizes the importance of a strong government in even a
developed country.
No matter how thuggish or arbitrary the government in a tin-pot dictatorship,
these are weak governments, not strong ones. Their military or police can
terrorize the unarmed citizenry but cannot provide decent law and order or stand
up to a determined armed opposition. Their administration cannot provide
sensible economic policy, good schools or clean drinking water. Strong
governments need to be peopled by those who can provide needed public goods
– they require expertise, motivation, and integrity. Realizing the importance of
strong government, developing countries constantly request multilateral
institutions for help in enhancing their governance capacity.
Strong governments may not, however, move in the right direction. Hitler
provided Germany with extremely effective administration – the trains ran on
time, as did the trains during our own Emergency in 1975-77. His was a strong
government, but Hitler took Germany efficiently and determinedly on a path to
ruin, overriding the rule of law and dispensing with elections. It is not sufficient
that the trains run on time, they have to go in the right direction at the desired
time. The physical rail network guiding the trains could be thought of as
analogous to rule of law, while the process by which consensus is built around
the train schedule could be thought of as democratic accountability.
But why do we need both rule of law and democratic accountability to keep
strong government on the right path? Would democratic accountability not be
enough to constrain a dictatorial government? Perhaps not! Hitler was elected to
power, and until Germany started suffering shortages and reversals in World War
II, enjoyed the support of the majority of the people. The rule of law is needed to
prevent the tyranny of the majority that can arise in a democracy, as well as to
ensure that basic ‘rules of the game’ are preserved over time so that the
environment is predictable, no matter which government comes to power. By
ensuring that all citizens have inalienable rights and protections, the rule of law
constrains the majority’s behaviour towards the minorities. And by maintaining a
predictable economic environment against populist democratic instincts, the rule
of law ensures that businesses can invest securely today for the future.
What about asking the question the other way? Would rule of law not be
enough? Probably not, especially in a vibrant developing society! Rule of law
provides a basic slow-changing code of conduct that cannot be violated by either
government or the citizenry. But that, by itself, may not be sufficient to
accommodate the aspirations of new emerging groups or the consequences of
new technologies or ideas. Democratic accountability ensures the government
responds to the wishes of the mass of the citizenry, allowing emerging groups to
gain influence through political negotiation and competition with others. Even if
groups cannot see their programmes translated into policy, democracy allows
them to blow off steam non-violently. So both rule of law and democratic
accountability check and balance strong government in complementary ways.
WHERE DO THESE THREE PILLARS COME FROM?
Much of Fukuyama’s work is focused on tracing the development of each pillar
in different societies. He suggests that the nature of states we see today is largely
explained by their historical experience. For instance, China had long periods of
chaos, most recently before the Communists came to power; groups engaged in
total war against one another. Such unbridled military competition meant groups
had to organize themselves as hierarchical military units, with rulers having
unlimited powers. When eventually a group was victorious over the others, it
was natural for it to impose centralized autocratic rule to ensure that chaos did
not re-emerge. To rule over the large geographic area of the country, China
needed a well-developed elite bureaucracy – hence the mandarins, chosen by
exam based on their learning. So China had strong unconstrained effective
government whenever it was united, and Fukuyama argues, unlike Western
Europe or India, did not have strong alternative sources of power founded in
religion or culture to impose rule of law.
In Western Europe, by contrast, the Christian church imposed constraints on
what the ruler could do. So military competition, coupled with constraints on the
ruler imposed by canon law, led to the emergence of both strong government and
rule of law.
In India, he argues, the caste system led to division of labour, which ensured
that entire populations could never be devoted totally to the war effort. So
through much of history, war was never as harsh, or military competition
between states as fierce, as in China. As a result, the historical pressure for
Indian states to develop strong governments that intruded into every facet of
society was muted. At the same time, however, the codes of just behaviour for
rulers emanating from ancient Indian scriptures served to constrain any arbitrary
exercise of power by Indian rulers. India, therefore, had weaker government,
constrained further by rule of law. And, according to Fukuyama, these differing
histories explain why government in China today is seen as effective but
unrestrained, while government capacity in India is seen as weak, but Indian
governments are rarely autocratic.
Any of these grand generalizations can, and should, be debated. Fukuyama
does not claim history is destiny, but does suggest a very strong influence. Of
course, the long influence of history and culture is less perceptible when it
comes to democracy where some countries like India have taken to it like a duck
to water. A vibrant, accountable democracy does not only imply that people cast
their vote freely every five years. It requires the full mix of a raucous
investigative press, public debate uninhibited by political correctness, many
political parties representing varied constituencies, and a variety of nongovernmental organizations organizing and representing interests. It will
continue to be a source of academic debate why a country like India has taken to
democracy, while some of its neighbours with similar historical and cultural
pasts have not.
I will not dwell on this. Instead, I turn to a different question that Fukuyama
does not address. Clearly, strong governments are needed for countries to have
the governance to prosper. Equally, free markets underpin prosperity. But why is
it that every rich country is also a liberal democracy subject to rule of law?
I will make two points in what follows: First, free enterprise and the political
freedom emanating from democratic accountability and rule of law can be
mutually reinforcing so a free enterprise system should be thought of as the
fourth pillar underpinning liberal market democracies. Second, the bedrock on
which all four pillars stand is a broadly equitable distribution of economic
capabilities among the citizenry. That bedrock is fissuring in industrial countries,
while it has to be strengthened in emerging markets like India.
FREE ENTERPRISE AND POLITICAL FREEDOM
Why are political freedoms in a country, of which representative democracy is a
central component, and free enterprise mutually supportive?
There is, of course, one key similarity: both a vibrant democracy and a
vibrant free enterprise system seek to create a level playing field which enhances
competition. In the democratic arena, the political entrepreneur competes with
other politicians for the citizen’s vote, based on his past record and future policy
agenda. In the economic sphere, the promoter competes with other entrepreneurs
for the consumer’s rupee, based on the quality of the product he sells.
But there is also at least one key difference. Democracy treats individuals
equally, with every adult getting one vote. The free enterprise system, by
contrast, empowers consumers based on how much income they get and property
they own. What then prevents the median voter in a democracy from voting to
dispossess the rich and successful? And why do the latter not erode the political
rights of the ordinary voter. This fundamental tension between democracy and
free enterprise appeared to be accentuated in the recent U.S. presidential
elections as President Barack Obama appealed to middle-class anger about its
stagnant economic prospects, while former Massachusetts governor Mitt
Romney appealed to business people, disgruntled about higher taxes and
expanding health care subsidies.
One reason that the median voter rationally agrees to protect the property of
the rich and to tax them moderately may be that she sees the rich as more
efficient managers of that property, and therefore as creators of jobs and
prosperity that everyone will benefit from. So, to the extent that the rich are selfmade, and have come out winners in a competitive, fair, and transparent market,
society may be better off allowing them to own and manage their wealth, settling
in return for a reasonable share of their produce as taxes. The more, however,
that the rich are seen as idle or crooked – as having simply inherited or, worse,
gained their wealth nefariously – the more the median voter should be willing to
vote for tough regulations and punitive taxes on them.
In some emerging markets today, for example, property rights of the rich do
not enjoy widespread popular support because so many of a country’s fabulously
wealthy oligarchs are seen as having acquired their wealth through dubious
means. They grew rich because they managed the system, not because they
managed their businesses well. When the government goes after rich tycoons,
few voices are raised in protest. And, as the rich kowtow to the authorities to
protect their wealth, a strong check on official arbitrariness disappears. The
government is free to become more autocratic.
Consider, in contrast, a competitive free-enterprise system with a level
playing field for all. Such a system generally tends to permit the most efficient to
acquire wealth. The fairness of the competition improves perceptions of
legitimacy. Moreover, under conditions of fair competition, the process of
creative destruction tends to pull down badly managed inherited wealth,
replacing it with new and dynamic wealth. Great inequality, built up over
generations, does not become a source of great popular resentment.
On the contrary, everyone can dream that they, too, will become a Bill Gates
or a Nandan Nilekani. When such universal aspirations seem plausible, the
system gains added democratic support. The rich, confident of popular
legitimacy, can then use the independence that accompanies wealth to limit
arbitrary government, support rule of law, and protect democratic rights. Free
enterprise and democracy sustain each other.
There are, therefore, deeper reasons for why democratic systems support
property rights and free enterprise than the cynical argument that votes and
legislators can be bought, and the capitalists have the money. The cynics can
only be right for a while. Without popular support, wealth is protected only by
increasingly coercive measures. Ultimately, such a system loses any vestige of
either democracy or free enterprise.
THE BEDROCK: EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF ECONOMIC CAPABILITIES
There is, however, a growing concern across the industrial world. The free
enterprise system works well when participants enter the competitive arena with
fundamentally equal chances of success. Given the subsequent level playing
field, the winner’s road to riches depends on greater effort, innovation, and
occasionally luck. But success is not pre-determined because no class of
participants has had a fundamentally different and superior preparation for the
competition. If, however, some group’s economic capabilities are sufficiently
differentiated by preparation, the level playing field is no longer sufficient to
equalize a priori chances of success. Instead, the free enterprise system will be
seen as disproportionately favouring the better prepared. Democracy is unlikely
to support it, nor are the rich and successful as likely to support democracy.
Such a scenario is no longer unthinkable in a number of Western
democracies. Prosperity seems increasingly unreachable for many, because a
good education, which seems to be today’s passport to riches, is unaffordable for
many in the middle class. Quality higher educational institutions are dominated
by the children of the rich, not because they have unfairly bought their way in,
but because they simply have been taught and supported better by expensive
schools and private tutors. Because middle class parents do not have the ability
to give their children similar capabilities, they do not see the system as fair.
Support for the free enterprise system is eroding, as witnessed by the popularity
of books like Thomas Pikkety’s Capital in the 21st Century while the influence
of illiberal parties on both the Left and Right who promise to suppress
competition, finance, and trade is increasing. The mutual support between free
enterprise and democracy is giving way to antagonism.
Moreover, as class differences create differentiated capabilities among the
public, governments can either continue choosing the most capable applicants
for positions but risk becoming unrepresentative of the classes, or they can
choose representativeness over ability, and risk eroding effectiveness. Neither
biased nor ineffective government can administer well. So government capacity
may also be threatened.
Thus, as the bedrock of equitable distribution of capabilities has started
developing cracks in industrial countries, all four pillars supporting the liberal
free market democracy have also started swaying. This is, to my mind, an
enormously important concern that will occupy states across the world in the
years to come.
LESSONS FOR INDIA
Let me conclude with lessons for India. India inherited a kind of democracy
during British rule and has made it thoroughly and vibrantly her own. Of the
three pillars that Fukuyama emphasizes, the strongest in India is therefore
democratic accountability. India also adheres broadly to the rule of law. Where
arguably we may have a long way to go, as Fukuyama has emphasized, is in the
capacity of the government (and by this I mean regulators like the RBI also) to
deliver governance and public services.
This is not to say that we do not have areas of excellence strewn throughout
central and state governments – whether it is the building of the New Delhi
Metro, the reach of the public distribution system in Tamil Nadu, or the speed of
the roll-out of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana – but that such capabilities
have to permeate every tehsil in every state. Moreover, in many areas of
government and regulation, as the economy develops, we need more specialists,
with the domain knowledge and experience. For instance, well-trained
economists are at a premium throughout the government, and there are far too
few Indian Economic Service officers to go around.
An important difference from the historical experience of other countries is
that elsewhere strong government has typically emerged there first, and it is then
restrained by rule of law and democratic accountability. In India, we have the
opposite situation today, with strong institutions like the judiciary, opposition
parties, the free press, and NGOs, whose aim is to check government excess.
However, necessary government function is sometimes hard to distinguish from
excess. We will have to strengthen government (and regulatory) capability
resisting the temptation to implant layers and layers of checks and balances even
before capacity has taken root. We must choose a happy medium between giving
the administration unchecked power and creating complete paralysis,
recognizing that our task is different from the one that confronted the West when
it developed, or even the task faced by other Asian economies.
For instance, a business-approval process that mandates numerous
government surveys in remote areas should also consider our administrative
capacity to do those surveys well and on time. If it does not provide for that
capacity, it ensures there will be no movement forward. Similarly, if we create a
multiple appellate process against government or regulatory action that is slow
and undiscriminating, we contain government excess but also risk halting
necessary government actions. If the government or regulator is less effective in
preparing its case than private parties, we ensure that the appellate process
largely biases justice towards those who have the resources to use it, rather than
rectifying a miscarriage of justice. So in thinking through reforms, we may want
to move from the theoretical ideal of how a system might work in a country with
enormous administrative capacity, to how it would work in the actual Indian
situation. Let me emphasize, we need ‘checks and balance’, but we should
ensure a balance of checks. We cannot have escaped from the Licence Permit
Raj only to end up in the Appellate Raj!
Finally, a heartening recent development is that more people across the
country are becoming well-educated and equipped to compete. One of the most
enjoyable experiences at the RBI is meeting the children of our Class IV
employees, many of whom hold jobs as business executives in private sector
firms. As, across the country, education makes our youth upwardly mobile,
public support for free enterprise has expanded. Increasingly, therefore, the
political dialogue has also moved, from giving handouts to creating jobs. So long
as we modulate the pace of liberalization to the pace at which we broaden
economic capabilities, it is likely that the public will be supportive of reform.
This also means that if we are to embed the four pillars supporting prosperity
and political freedom firmly in our society, we have to continue to nurture the
broadly equitable distribution of economic capabilities among our people.
Economic inclusion, by which I mean easing access to quality education,
nutrition, health care, finance, and markets to all our citizens, is therefore a
necessity for sustainable growth. It is also, obviously, a moral imperative.
Postscript: One name in this entire speech proved controversial: ‘Hitler’. If I had known the
connections that would be made on social media, I would not have used it. The speech was about the
need to remedy the weakness of government capacity in general in India – with no specific
administration in mind. It was instead construed as a warning against strong government, specifically
the current administration. I could not, however, bulletproof my speeches against any and all imagined
interpretations.
T
V
Perhaps the most important proposal for the reshaping of India’s future path during my tenure was the
NDA government’s proposal to ‘Make in India’. I thought this was an excellent idea, for it would mean
the government would focus on improving India’s capacity to produce, whether it be goods or services,
either for the domestic economy through import substitution, or for the global economy through
exports. I thought it important to clarify that making in India did not necessarily mean selling primarily
to the export markets. Given both slow global growth, as well as increasing protectionism, we should
not rule out making for the large and vibrant Indian market. Indeed, for a while, this could well be the
primary growth market for Indian products. In the short run, we would probably make in India, largely
for India. The longer run could be different, depending on how circumstances developed. This is what
I laid out in my Dr Bharat Ram Lecture, delivered in Delhi in December 2014, which was primarily a
speech about how we should manage risks if we catered primarily to domestic demand.
Make in India, Largely for India
he global economy is still weak, despite a strengthening recovery in the
United States. The Euro area is veering close to recession, Japan has already
experienced two quarters of negative growth after a tax hike, and many emerging
markets are rethinking their export-led growth models as the industrial world
stagnates. In the last couple of years, the IMF has repeatedly reduced its growth
forecasts. After six years of a tepid post-crisis recovery, the IMF titled its most
recent World Economic Outlook ‘Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties’.
WHAT ABOUT EMERGING MARKETS?
Slow industrial country growth has made more difficult a traditional
development path for emerging markets – export-led growth. Indeed, in the last
decade, even as China developed on the back of its exports to industrial
countries, other emerging markets flourished as they exported to China.
Emerging markets now have to rely once again on domestic demand, always a
difficult task because of the temptation to overstimulate. That task has become
more difficult because of the abundance of liquidity sloshing around the world as
a result of ultra-accommodative monetary policies in industrial countries. Any
signs of growth can attract foreign capital, and if not properly managed, these
flows can precipitate a credit and asset price boom and exchange rate
overvaluation. When industrial country monetary policies are eventually
tightened, some of the capital is likely to depart emerging market shores.
Emerging markets have to take extreme care to ensure they are not vulnerable at
that point.
What implications should an emerging economy like India, which has
weathered the initial squalls of the ‘Taper Tantrums’ of the summer of 2013, take
away for its policies over the medium term? I would focus on four: 1) Make in
India; 2) Make for India; 3) Ensure transparency and stability of the economy; 4)
Work towards a more open and fair global system.
LESSONS FOR INDIA
1. MAKE IN INDIA
The government has the commendable aim of making more in India. This means
improving the efficiency of producing in India, whether of agricultural
commodities, mining, manufacturing, or services.
To achieve this goal, it has to implement its ambitious plans for building out
infrastructure. This includes
Physically linking every corner of the country to domestic and
international markets through roads, railways, ports and airports. The
kind of economic activity that is generated when a pukka all-weather
road is built into a village – the explosion of horticulture, poultry, and
dairy farming, the opening of clothing and assorted goods shops, the
increasing use of powered vehicles – is extraordinary, as is the kind of
activity that emerges around national highways.
Ensuring the availability of inputs such as power, minerals, and water at
competitive prices.
Linking everyone electronically and financially to the broader system
through mobiles, broadband, and intermediaries such as business
correspondents.
Encouraging the development of public institutions such as markets,
warehouses, regulators, information aggregators and disseminators, etc.
Making possible affordable and safe homes and workplaces.
A second necessity for increasing productivity in India is to improve human
capital. This requires enhancing the quality and spread of health care, nutrition,
and sanitation to start with so that people are healthy and able. People also need
better and more appropriate education, skills that are valued in the labour
markets, and jobs where firms have the incentive to invest more in their learning.
The government is examining the cost of doing business in India with a view
to bring it down. The woes of the small entrepreneur, as she confronts the myriad
mysterious regulations that govern her, and the numerous inspectors who have
the power of closing her down, are well known. The petty bureaucrat,
empowered by these regulations, can become a tyrant. It is appropriate that the
government intends to make him help business rather than hinder it. As
regulators, we too have to continuously examine the costs and benefits of the
regulations we impose.
Finally, we need make access to finance easier. I have spoken about that in
other contexts, and will not dwell on it here. Before I move on, let me add some
caveats.
There is a danger when we discuss ‘Make in India’ of assuming it means a
focus on manufacturing, an attempt to follow the export-led growth path that
China followed. I don’t think such a specific focus is intended.
First, as I have just argued, slow-growing industrial countries will be much
less likely to be able to absorb a substantial additional amount of imports in the
foreseeable future. Other emerging markets certainly could absorb more, and a
regional focus for exports will pay off. But the world as a whole is unlikely to be
able to accommodate another export-led China.
Second, industrial countries themselves have been improving capitalintensive flexible manufacturing, so much so that some manufacturing activity is
being ‘re-shored’. Any emerging market wanting to export manufacturing goods
will have to contend with this new phenomenon. Third, when India pushes into
manufacturing exports, it will have China, which still has some surplus
agricultural labour to draw on, to contend with. Export-led growth will not be as
easy as it was for the Asian economies who took that path before us.
I am not advocating export pessimism here – India has been extremely
successful at carving out its own areas of comparative advantage, and will
continue to do so. Instead, I am counselling against an export-led strategy that
involves subsidizing exporters with cheap inputs as well as an undervalued
exchange rate, simply because it is unlikely to be as effective at this juncture. I
am also cautioning against picking a particular sector such as manufacturing for
encouragement, simply because it has worked well for China. India is different,
and developing at a different time, and we should be agnostic about what will
work.
More broadly, such agnosticism means creating an environment where all
sorts of enterprise can flourish, and then leaving entrepreneurs, of whom we
have plenty, to choose what they want to do. Instead of subsidizing inputs to
specific industries because they are deemed important or labour intensive, a
strategy that has not really paid off for us over the years, let us figure out the
public goods each sector needs, and strive to provide them. For instance, SMEs
might benefit much more from an agency that can certify product quality, or a
platform to help them sell receivables, or a state portal that will create marketing
websites for them, than from subsidized credit. The tourist industry will
probably benefit more from visa on arrival and a strong transportation network
than from the tax sops they usually demand.
A second possible misunderstanding is to see ‘Make in India’ as a strategy of
import substitution through tariff barriers. This strategy has been tried and it has
not worked because it ended up reducing domestic competition, making
producers inefficient, and increasing costs to consumers. Instead, ‘Make in India’
will typically mean more openness, as we create an environment that makes our
firms able to compete with the rest of the world, and encourages foreign
producers to come take advantage of our environment to create jobs in India.
2. MAKE FOR INDIA
If external demand growth is likely to be muted, we have to produce for the
internal market. This means we have to work on creating the strongest
sustainable unified market we can, which requires a reduction in the transactions
costs of buying and selling throughout the country. Improvements in the physical
transportation network I discussed earlier will help, but so will fewer but more
efficient and competitive intermediaries in the supply chain from producer to the
consumer. A well-designed GST bill, by reducing state border taxes, will have
the important consequence of creating a truly national market for goods and
services, which will be critical for our growth in years to come.
Domestic demand has to be financed responsibly, as far as possible through
domestic savings. Our banking system is undergoing some stress. Our banks
have to learn from past mistakes in project evaluation and structuring as they
finance the immense needs of the economy. They will also have to improve their
efficiency as they compete with new players such as the recently licenced
universal banks as well as the soon-to-be licensed payment banks and small
finance banks. At the same time, we should not make their task harder by
creating impediments in the process of turning around, or recovering, stressed
assets. The RBI, the government, as well as the courts have considerable work to
do here.
We also have to work on spreading financial services to the excluded, for
once they learn how to manage finances and save they can be relied on to
borrow responsibly. New institutions and new products to seek out financial
savings in every corner of the country will also help halt the erosion in
household savings rates, as will a low and stable inflation rate. The income tax
benefits for an individual to save have been largely fixed in nominal terms till
the recent budget, which means the real value of the benefits have eroded. Some
budgetary incentives for household savings could help ensure that the country’s
investment is largely financed from domestic savings.
3. ENSURE TRANSPARENCY AND STABILITY OF THE ECONOMY
As I argued earlier in the speech, even developed countries like Portugal and
Spain have been singularly unable to manage domestic demand. Countries tend
to overstimulate, with large fiscal deficits, large current account deficits, high
credit and asset price growth, only to see growth collapse as money gets tight.
The few countries that have avoided such booms and busts typically have done
so with sound policy frameworks.
As a country that does not belong to any power blocs, we do not ever want to
be in a position where we need multilateral support. It will be all the more
important to get our policy frameworks right.
Clearly, a sound fiscal framework around a clear fiscal consolidation path is
critical. The Dr Bimal Jalan Committee’s report will provide a gameplan for the
former, while the government has clearly indicated its intent to stick to the fiscal
consolidation path that has been laid out. Whether we need more institutions to
ensure deficits stay within control and the quality of budgets is high, is
something worth debating. A number of countries have independent budget
offices/committees that opine on budgets. These offices are especially important
in scoring budgetary estimates, including unfunded long-term liabilities that the
industrial countries have shown are so easy to contract in times of growth and so
hard to actually deliver.
On the monetary side, a central bank focused primarily on keeping inflation
low and stable will ensure the best conditions for growth. In reacting to
developments, however, the central bank has to recognize that emerging markets
are not as resilient as industrial economies. So the path of disinflation cannot be
as steep as in an industrial economy because an emerging market is more fragile,
and people’s buffers and safety nets are thinner. A ‘Volcker’ like disinflation was
never on the cards in India, but an Urjit Patel glide path fits us very well,
ensuring moderate growth even while we disinflate. Going forward, we will
discuss an appropriate timeline with the government in which the economy
should move to the centre of the medium-term inflation band of 2 to 6 per cent.
In addition to inflation, however, a central bank has to pay attention to
financial stability. This is a secondary objective, but it may become central if the
economy enters a low-inflation credit and asset price boom. Financial stability
sometimes means regulators, including the central bank, have to go against
popular sentiment. The role of regulators is not to boost the Sensex but to ensure
that the underlying fundamentals of the economy and its financial system are
sound enough for sustainable growth. Any positive consequences to the Sensex
are welcome but are only a collateral benefit, not the objective.
Finally, India will, for the foreseeable future, run a current account deficit,
which means we will need net foreign financing. The best form of financing is
long-term equity, that is, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), which has the
additional benefit of bringing in new technologies and methods. While we
should not be railroaded into compromising India’s interest to attract FDI – for
example, the requirements to patent a medicine in India are perfectly reasonable,
no matter what the international drug companies say – we should ensure policies
are transparent and redress quick. If we make it easier for young Indian
companies to do business, we will also make it easier for foreign companies to
invest, for after all both are outsiders to the system. This means a transparent and
quick legal process to deal with contractual disputes, and a proper system of
bankruptcy to deal with distress. Both are issues the government has taken on.
Let me turn finally to the international framework.
4. WORK TOWARDS A MORE OPEN AND FAIR GLOBAL SYSTEM
As a country that does not belong to any power bloc, and that does not export
vital natural resources but is dependent on substantial commodity imports, India
needs an open, competitive and vibrant system of international trade and finance.
Our energy security, for example, lies not in owning oil assets in remote fragile
countries but in ensuring the global oil market works well and is not disrupted.
We need strong independent multilateral institutions that can play the role of
impartial arbiter in facilitating international economic transactions.
Unfortunately, the international monetary system is still dominated by the
frameworks put in place in the past by industrial countries, and its governance is
still dominated by their citizens. To be fair, it is changing, albeit slowly. But
there is a more immediate reason for faster change. With slow growth, as well as
the need to finance large debt loads, the interest of industrial countries in an open
global system cannot be taken for granted. For instance, regulations that have the
appearance of shoring up the safety and soundness of the industrial country
financial system may have the collateral effect of discouraging investment in
emerging market assets. We have to recognize that slow growth may direct
industrial economy policy makers’ attention inwards, even while politics turns
protectionist. The multilateral governance system, still dominated by industrial
countries, may not provide a sufficient defence of openness.
Emerging markets may therefore have the responsibility of keeping the
global economy open. For this, not only do emerging markets have to work on
quota and management reforms in the multilateral institutions, but they also have
to work on injecting new agendas, new ideas, and new thinking into the global
arena. No longer will it suffice for India to simply object to industrial country
proposals, it will have to put some of its own on the table. And this means that
our research departments, universities, and think tanks have to develop ideas that
they can feed to India’s representatives in international meetings.
CONCLUSION
Let me conclude. We are more dependent on the global economy than we think.
That it is growing more slowly, and is more inward looking, than in the past
means that we have to look to regional and domestic demand for our growth – to
make in India primarily for India. Domestic-demand-led growth is notoriously
difficult to manage, and typically leads to excess. This is why we need to
strengthen domestic macroeconomic institutions, so that we can foster
sustainable and stable growth. At the same time, we cannot let foreign markets
shrink further, and we have to take up the fight for an open global system. Rather
than being reactive, we have to be active in setting the agenda. That requires
investment in our idea-producing institutions – research departments of official
bodies, think tanks, as well as universities. In sum, the diminished expectations
in the world at large should not be a reason for us to lower our sights.
Postscript: This speech was ultimately one on national risk management – what we needed to do in the
environment of falling trade and rising protectionism that faced us. It became mildly controversial, I
believe, because it was misunderstood. Critics said it was an attack on ‘Make in India’, and I was
proposing an alternative, ‘Make for India’. This was completely incorrect. No sensible economist
could be against making in India if that came from an improvement in the business and infrastructure
environment rather than our old, discredited policy of raising import barriers to encourage import
substitution. Equally clearly, my critics had not read the title ‘Make in India, Largely for India’, let
alone the content of the speech, which elaborated on, and extended, the government proposal. I did not
disagree with where one should encourage production – we should ‘Make in India’. Where I felt some
of the narrow votaries were being overly optimistic is in expecting strong global demand at this time,
given global weakness. I was not advocating export pessimism, but realism, borne out by the
subsequent significant weakness in exports that we have experienced. We had to make in India, but
initially largely for India, and so we have done at the time of writing.
T
VI
I was invited to give the convocation address at my alma mater, the Indian Institute of Technology,
Delhi. As I pondered over what I would say, I realized that the graduating students were young enough
to be my children. What message would I give my children at this time, a message that would
challenge as well as inspire them, as convocation speeches are meant to do? It could not be another
speech on economics – that might educate but not inspire. The moment made the choice of topic clear.
There was a raging debate in India in late 2015 on the issue of tolerance, and this is what I decided to
speak on. I explained to the young graduating scholars that India’s strength is her enduring tradition of
tolerance and debate, and that it will be our source of comparative economic advantage as we approach
the frontiers of innovation. This is the speech I delivered on 31 October 2015.
Tolerance and Respect: Essentials for Economic
Progress
hank you very much for inviting me back to the Institute to deliver the
convocation address. I graduated with a degree in Electrical Engineering
thirty years ago. I was overly anxious then about what the future held for me,
because I did not realize that the Institute had prepared me so well for what lay
ahead. Our professors – and I will not single out any to avoid a disservice to
those I do not name – were dedicated professionals. They asked a lot of us,
knowing that in challenging us they allowed us to learn what we were capable
of. Equally important, our Electrical Engineering class – in those days,
Computer Science was part of Electrical Engineering in IIT Delhi – had some of
the smartest people it has been my privilege to know. After working with them
as colleagues, and competing with them for grades, I learned what it took to
succeed in the fiercest environments; very hard work, friendship, and boatloads
of luck. Those lessons have stayed with me since.
IIT Delhi then, as I am sure it is now, was not only about studies – it was
about growing up. We were, with a few notable exceptions, the proverbial school
nerds who had been excluded from all school sports by the macho sports cases.
With almost everyone in the same boat at IIT, for the first time in our lives we
got a chance to bat and bowl at the nets, instead of being posted at deep long on
to retrieve the odd six by the stars. Everyone did something, ranging from
photography to publishing. Of course, we all aspired to join dramatics, where
you got to spend long hours with members of the opposite sex. Unfortunately, I
was no good at acting, so I had to look for self-actualization elsewhere. But there
were enough places to look.
Student politics was vibrant, with plenty of scheming, strategizing, and backstabbing. It was an intellectual pastime, however, without the violence and
corruption that plagues student politics elsewhere in our country. You had to
convince the small intelligent electorate to vote for you, and in figuring out how
to get that vote, we all learnt the art of persuasion.
So we grew up in the classrooms, in the squash courts at the RCA, in the
civilizing SPIC-Macay overnight classical music concerts and in the
overcrowded rock concerts at the OAT. Some of us spent long hours waiting
hopefully outside Kailash Hostel, and when occasionally our wait was rewarded,
beautiful autumn nights with our friends, chatting and gazing at the stars while
sitting on the roof of Convocation Hall. The Institute replaced our naivety with a
more confident maturity. We came in as smart boys and girls and left as wiser
young men and women. I am confident that the Institute has done to you what it
did to us. You will thank it in the years to come for that.
In speaking here today, I am aware that most convocation addresses are soon
forgotten. That creates a form of moral hazard for the speaker. If you are not
going to remember what I say, I don’t have the incentive to work hard at crafting
my words. The net effect is what economists refer to as a bad equilibrium; my
speech is forgettable, and you therefore forget it soon. If so, we are probably
better off with me skipping the rest of the speech, and all of us going on to other
pressing duties.
Nevertheless, I am going to look beyond my personal incentives and fulfil
my dharma as chief guest. I will speak on why India’s tradition of debate and an
open spirit of enquiry is critical for its economic progress. Let me explain.
Robert Solow won the Nobel Prize in Economics for work that showed that
the bulk of economic growth did not come from putting more factors of
production such as labour and capital to work. Instead, it came from putting
those factors of production together more cleverly, that is, from what he called
total factor productivity growth. Put differently, new ideas, new methods of
production, better logistics – these are what lead to sustained economic growth.
Of course, a poor country like ours can grow for some time by putting more
people to work, by moving them from low productivity agriculture to higher
value-added industry or services, and by giving them better tools to do their jobs.
As many of you who have taken economics will recognize, we in India are
usually far from the production possibility frontier, so we can grow for a long
while just by catching up with the methods of industrial countries.
But more intelligent ways of working will enable us to leapfrog old methods
and come more quickly to the production possibility frontier – as for example,
we have done in parts of the software industry. And, of course, once you are at
the frontier and using the best methods in the world, the only way to grow is to
innovate and be even better than others in the world. This is what our software
firms are now trying to do.
Our alums, whom you students will shortly join, are leading India’s charge to
the frontier and beyond. Take the fantastic developments in e-commerce, ranging
from the creation of electronic marketplaces to new logistics networks and
payments systems. Today, a consumer in a small town can have the same choice
of clothing fashions that anyone from the large metros enjoys, simply because
the Internet has brought all the shops in India to her doorstep. And while her
local shop no longer can sell shoddy apparel, it now focuses on the perishable
items she needs in a hurry, even while sub-contracting to provide the last leg of
the logistic network that reaches her. Economic growth through new ideas and
production methods is what our professors and alums contribute to the nation.
So what does an educational institution or a nation need to do to keep the
idea factory open? The first essential is to foster competition in the marketplace
for ideas. This means encouraging challenge to all authority and tradition, even
while acknowledging that the only way of dismissing any view is through
empirical tests. What this rules out is anyone imposing a particular view or
ideology because of their power. Instead, all ideas should be scrutinized
critically, no matter whether they originate domestically or abroad, whether they
have matured over thousands of years or a few minutes, whether they come from
an untutored student or a world-famous professor.
I am sure many of you have come across Richard Feynman’s Lectures on
Physics, a must-read when we were at IIT. The Nobel prize-winning physicist
was one of the giants of the twentieth century. In his autobiography, though, he
writes how he found the atmosphere at the Institute of Advanced Studies at
Princeton stultifying. Now, as you know, the Institute of Advanced Studies
brings together some of the finest scholars in the world to ponder problems in a
multi-disciplinary environment. But he found the atmosphere sterile because
there were no students to ask him questions, questions that would force him to
rethink his beliefs and perhaps discover new theories. Ideas start with
questioning and alternative viewpoints, sometimes seemingly silly ones. After
all, Einstein built his Theory of Relativity pondering the somewhat wacky
question of what someone travelling in a train at the speed of light would
experience. So nothing should be excluded but everything should be subject to
debate and constant testing. No one should be allowed to offer unquestioned
pronouncements. Without this competition for ideas, we have stagnation.
This then leads to a second essential: protection, not of specific ideas and
traditions, but the right to question and challenge, the right to behave differently
so long as it does not hurt others seriously. In this protection lies societal selfinterest, for it is by encouraging the challenge of innovative rebels that society
develops, that it gets the ideas that propel Solow’s total factor productivity
growth. Fortunately, India has always protected debate and the right to have
different views. Some have even embedded these views in permanent structures.
Raja Raja Chola, in building the magnificent Brihadeeswara Shaivite temple at
Thanjavur, also incorporated sculptures of Vishnu as well as the meditating
Buddha, thus admitting to alternative viewpoints. When Shahenshah Jalaluddin
Muhammad Akbar invited scholars of all manner of persuasion to debate the
eternal verities at his court, he was only following older traditions of our Hindu
and Buddhist kings, who encouraged and protected the spirit of enquiry.
What then of group sentiment? Should ideas or behaviour that hurt a
particular intellectual position or group not be banned? Possibly, but a quick
resort to bans will chill all debate as everyone will be anguished by ideas they
dislike. It is far better to improve the environment for ideas through tolerance
and mutual respect.
Let me explain. Actions that physically harm anyone, or show verbal
contempt for a particular group so that they damage the group’s participation in
the marketplace for ideas, should certainly not be allowed. For example, sexual
harassment, whether physical or verbal, has no place in society. At the same
time, groups should not be looking for slights any and everywhere, so that too
much is seen as offensive; the theory of confirmation bias in psychology
suggests that once one starts looking for insults, one can find them everywhere,
even in the most innocuous statements. Indeed, if what you do offends me but
does not harm me otherwise, there should be a very high bar for prohibiting your
act. After all, any ban, and certainly any vigilante acts to enforce it, may offend
you as much, or more, than the offence to me. Excessive political correctness
stifles progress as much as excessive licence and disrespect.
Put differently, while you should avoid pressing the buttons that upset me to
the extent possible, when you do push them you should explain carefully why
that is necessary so as to move the debate forward, and how it should not be
interpreted as a personal attack on me. You have to tread respectfully, assuring
me that a challenge to the ideas I hold is necessary for progress. At the same
time, I should endeavour to hold few ideas so closely intertwined with my
personality that any attack on them is deemed an intolerable personal affront.
Tolerance means not being so insecure about one’s ideas that one cannot subject
them to challenge – it implies a degree of detachment that is absolutely
necessary for mature debate. Finally, respect requires that in the rare case when
an idea is tightly associated with a group’s core personality, we are extra careful
about challenging it.
Tolerance can take the offence out of debate, and indeed instil respect. If I go
berserk every time a particular button is pressed, rebels are tempted to press the
button, while mischief-makers indeed do so. But if I do not react predictably, and
instead ask button pressers to explain their concerns, rebels are forced to do the
hard work of marshalling arguments. So, rebels do not press the button
frivolously, while the thuggish mischief-makers who abound in every group are
left without an easy trigger. Tolerance and respect then lead to a good
equilibrium where they reinforce each other.
For example, rebellious youth in the United States used to burn the American
flag. It was calculated to upset the older generation that had fought in America’s
wars, for the flag was a symbol of all they had fought for. And the police, many
of whom were veterans, used to react with violence, which was precisely the
reaction the rebels sought to further their cause. Over time, though, U.S. society
has become more tolerant of flag-burning. Because it no longer triggers a
reaction, it is no longer used as an instrument to shock. In sum, if group
sentiment becomes more tolerant and less easily hurt, the actions that try to hurt
it will diminish. As Mahatma Gandhi said, ‘The golden rule of conduct is mutual
toleration, seeing that we will never all think alike and we shall always see Truth
in fragments and from different points of vision.’
Let me conclude. IITans like you will lead India’s race for ideas. The India
that you will graduate into is much more capable of using your technological
prowess than the India we graduated into. I wish you unlimited ambition, and
forecast great success for those of you who continue thinking and challenging.
But as you go out in the world, remember our tradition of debate in an
environment of respect and tolerance. By upholding it, by fighting for it, you
will be repaying your teachers in this great institution, and your parents who
worked so hard to send you here. And you will be doing our country a great
patriotic service. Thank you and good luck.
Postscript: I knew this speech would be misinterpreted by the usual critics, but I had decided to look
beyond them. Once again, many who did not read, criticized nevertheless. They felt I was complaining
about India’s intolerance when in fact the speech is about maintaining our tradition for tolerance. Some
of the commentary bordered on the hilarious, essentially saying ‘we are a tolerant nation, he accuses us
of intolerance, so fire him’ or words to that effect. What mattered most to me, however, was a one-liner
from one of my staunchest young critics, my teenage son. From far away, he read my speech closely,
and satisfied it met his exacting standards, he wrote, ‘I am proud of you.’
VII
Social media does take a life of its own. In its world of alternative truths, the reality can get grossly
distorted. Occasionally, in a game resembling Chinese Whispers, each commentator opined on what
they thought I had said, based on a previous commentator’s garbled version, without many bothering
to find out what I actually said.
Speaking of being misunderstood, perhaps the greatest flak I got was for some comments I made at
the end of a tiring day at the IMF meetings. I was being interviewed for MarketWatch by Greg Robb,
whom I knew well. In the middle of a long interview, the question I was posed was:
MarketWatch: The Indian economy is the bright spot in the global economy. When other central
bankers and finance ministers ask you for your secret sauce, what do you tell them?
My natural caution as a central banker as well as my concern that our recovery was work in progress
suggested I should not boast. So here is what I said.
Rajan: Well, I think we’ve still to get to a place where we feel satisfied. We have this saying, ‘in
the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.’ We’re a little bit that way. We feel things are
turning to the point where we could achieve what we believe is our medium-run growth potential.
Because things are falling into place. Investment is starting to pick up strongly. We have a fair
degree of macro-stability. Of course, not immune to every shock, but immune to a fair number of
shocks. The current account deficit is around 1 per cent. The fiscal deficit has come down and
continues to come down and the government is firm on a consolidation path. Inflation has come
down from 11 per cent to less than 5 per cent now. And interest rates therefore can also come
down. We have an inflation targeting framework in place. So a bunch of good things have
happened.
There are still some things to do. Of course, structural reforms are ongoing. The government
is engaged in bringing out a new bankruptcy code. There is goods and services tax on the anvil.
But there is a lot of exciting stuff which is already happening. For example, just last week, I was
fortunate to inaugurate a platform which allows mobile-to-mobile transfers from any bank
account to any other bank account in the country. It is a public platform, so anybody can
participate. It is not owned by any one company, unlike Apple Pay or Android Pay or whatever. I
think it is the first of its kind. So technological developments are happening and making for a
more, hopefully, reasonable life for a lot of people. Let’s see how it goes.
On any fair read of my entire answer, one would conclude that I was optimistic about India, not
downplaying what was going on, even while recognizing we had work to do. But social media went to
town after plucking just the following words out of the answer: ‘We have this saying, “in the land of
A
the blind, the one-eyed man is king.” We’re a little bit that way.’ A couple of ministers, fed this quote,
commented adversely on what I said. I was finally fed up of the perhaps motivated search for
controversy. So I picked the National Institute of Bank Management Convocation on 20 April 2016 to
say the following, cautioning on euphoria and ending by emphasizing once again the need for mutual
respect and tolerance.
Words Matter but So Does Intent
s I reflected on what I should speak on, I thought I would speak on a recent
experience that offers what the Americans call ‘a teachable moment’. To
get to the experience, start first with where India is. India is the fastest growing
large country in the world, though with manufacturing capacity utilization low at
70 per cent and agricultural growth slow following two bad monsoons, our
potential is undoubtedly higher.
Growth, however, is just one measure of performance. The level of per capita
GDP is also important. We are still one of the poorest large countries in the
world on a per capita basis, and have a long way to go before we reasonably
address the concerns of each one of our citizens. We are often compared with
China. But the Chinese economy, which was smaller than ours in the 1960s, is
now five times our size at market exchange rates. The average Chinese citizen is
over four times richer than the average Indian. The sobering thought is we have
a long way to go before we can claim we have arrived.
As a central banker who has to be pragmatic, I cannot get euphoric if India is
the fastest growing large economy. Our current growth certainly reflects the hard
work of the government and the people of the country, but we have to repeat this
performance for the next twenty years before we can give every Indian a decent
livelihood. This is not to disparage what has been and is being done. The central
and state governments have been creating a platform for strong and sustainable
growth, and I am confident the payoffs are on their way, but until we have stayed
on this path for some time, I remain cautious.
We must remember that our international reputation is of a country with great
promise, which has under-delivered in the past. This is why we are still the
poorest country on a per capita basis among the BRICS. We need to change
perceptions by delivering steadily on our promise for a long time – by
implementing, implementing, and implementing. We cannot get carried away by
our current superiority in growth, for as soon as we believe in our own
superiority and start distributing future wealth as if we already have it, we stop
doing all that is required to continue growing. This movie has played too many
times in India’s past for us to not know how it ends.
So in speaking to a foreign journalist the other day, who asked what it felt
like to be the bright spot in the world economy, I used the phrase ‘Andhon mein
kana raja’ or ‘In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king’. The proverb
has a long multinational history. The Dutch philosopher, Erasmus, used it in
Latin when he wrote ‘In regione caecorum rex est luscus’, but he probably was
inspired by earlier work.
My intent was to signal that our outperformance was accentuated because
world growth was weak, but we in India were still hungry for more growth. I
then explained that we were not yet at our potential, though we were at a cusp of
a substantial pick-up in growth given all the reforms that were under way.
In our news-hungry country, however, our domestic papers headlined the
phrase I used. To be fair, they also offered the surrounding context, but few read
beyond the headline. So the interview became moderately controversial, with the
implication that I was denigrating our success rather than emphasizing the need
to do more.
More generally, every word or phrase a public figure speaks is intensely
wrung for meaning. When words are hung to dry out of context, as in a
newspaper headline, it then becomes fair game for anyone who wants to fill in
meaning to create mischief. Worst, of course, are words or proverbs that have
common usage elsewhere, because those can be most easily and deliberately
misinterpreted. If we are to have a reasonable public dialogue, everyone should
read words in their context, not stripped of it. That may be a forlorn hope!
I do, however, want to apologize to a section of the population that I did hurt,
the blind. After all, the proverb suggests that a one-eyed man is better than a
blind one. A moment’s thought suggests this is not true. For the blind can
develop capabilities that more than make up for their disability. Indeed, the sheer
willpower and hunger to succeed of the disabled can help them become overachievers in a seeing man’s world. Moreover, because their other faculties, such
as touch, smell, and hearing, are more finely honed, the blind may add new
perspectives and new variety to our world, making it richer and more vibrant. So
I am indeed sorry for implying the blind were otherwise than capable.
But this leads to an important question. How much of our language is tinged
with meaning that is liable to misinterpretation? How forgiving should we be of
a bad choice of words when the intent is clearly different?
Let me give you two examples. Gandhiji used to say, ‘An eye for an eye will
only make the whole world go blind’. Clearly, what is implied is that the whole
world going blind is not a desirable state of affairs. One might take umbrage
since it suggests blindness is an inferior state to that of being able to see, and the
saying could be seen as discriminatory. Yet Gandhiji’s focus was on the
absurdity of a policy of revenge, not on blindness, and his intent was not to
disparage the blind.
My second example comes from a faculty meeting I once attended where a
male professor used the phrase ‘As a rule of thumb’ to make his point. A female
history professor became visibly agitated and angry. She explained that ‘the rule
of thumb’ referred historically to the maximum width of the stick with which a
man could beat his wife without breaking the law. She was angry the male
professor used the phrase so lightly, seemingly condoning domestic violence.
He, of course, had no clue of the historical origins of the phrase, and apologized
profusely. Clearly, his ignorance suggested he had no intent to offend, yet the
female professor was offended.
There are two important issues here. First, if we spend all our time watching
our words and using inoffensive language or hedging everything with caveats,
we will be dull and will not be able to communicate because no one will listen.
For instance, ‘An eye for an eye will only make the world go blind’ could be
replaced by ‘Revenge reduces collective welfare’. The latter is short, inoffensive,
and pithy, but meaningless for most listeners. Alternatively, we could say ‘The
taking of any body part for another will temporarily reduce the collective
capabilities of the population thus affected, until they develop the faculties that
will allow them to compensate for the missing body parts.’ This restatement is
more correct than the original, but lacks zing and therefore the ability to
persuade.
At the same time, not paying attention to words or phrases that give offence
risks perpetuating debilitating stereotypes that prevent advancement. When
referring to bankers, scientists, engineers, or surgeons in the abstract, we often
refer to them as ‘he’, thus perpetuating the unfortunate stereotype that these are
not jobs for women. Clearly, in doing so we ignore the increasing presence, and
even dominance, of women in these fields. What should we do to remedy
matters?
I think we all have work to do to improve public dialogue. Speakers have to
be more careful with words and not be gratuitously offensive. At the same time,
listeners should not look for insults everywhere, and should place words in
context so as to understand intent. In other words, for effective communication
and debate, rather than the angry exchanges that we see on some TV shows, we
need both respect and tolerance. The greatest danger of all is that we do not
communicate or debate, for then we will allow distorted stereotypes to flourish
unchallenged, and divisiveness to increase. In a country like ours, conceived and
flourishing in diversity, that will truly be a disaster.
Interestingly, some of the reports of this speech were also confused. Was I contrite and apologizing for
my words, was I apologizing to the blind, or was I defiant. I thought there was no need to clarify
further. Those who did not wish to understand could not be forced to do so.
A
CHAPTER 8
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
I
Through much of my term, I worried about the flood of liquidity unleashed by the central banks of
industrial countries. In my previous role as Chief Economic Advisor, and co-chair of the Framework
Working Group of the G-20, I, together with my very capable advisors, including Dr Prachi Mishra,
had pushed the G-20 to finally recognize the possible adverse spillover effects (through capital flows)
caused by industrial country monetary policies. When the U.S. Federal Reserve embarked on its
process of tightening, I spoke publicly of the need for it to take the consequences of its actions around
the world into account – I was committing the cardinal central banker sin of commenting on another
central bank’s policy, but I thought it was important for India. While I was not naïve enough to believe
this would alter Fed policy, it contributed to an attitudinal change. Perhaps as a result of such
commentary from a variety of sources, the Fed did say in a number of its subsequent statements that it
was sensitive to conditions outside the United States, and in one policy meeting, may have held its
hand because of unsettled conditions abroad. At any rate, I was invited to give a speech at the
Brookings Institution on 10 April 2014 on my concerns.* Ben Bernanke, the recently retired Fed
Chairman, was in the audience.
Competitive Monetary Easing: Is It Yesterday Once
More?
s the world seems to be struggling back to its feet after the great financial
crisis, I want to draw attention to an area we need to be concerned about:
the conduct of monetary policy in this integrated world. A good way to describe
the current environment is one of extreme monetary easing through
unconventional policies. In a world where debt overhangs and the need for
structural change constrain domestic demand, a sizeable portion of the effects of
such policies spill over across borders, sometimes through a weaker exchange
rate. More worryingly, it prompts a reaction. Such competitive easing occurs
both simultaneously and sequentially, as I will argue, and both advanced
economies and emerging economies engage in it. Aggregate world demand may
be weaker and more distorted than it should be, and financial risks higher. To
ensure stable and sustainable growth, the international rules of the game need to
be revisited. Both advanced economies and emerging economies need to adapt,
else I fear we are about to embark on the next leg of a wearisome cycle.
Central bankers are usually reluctant to air their concerns in public. But
because the needed change has political elements to it, I take my cue from
speeches by two central bankers whom I respect greatly, Ben Bernanke in his
2005 ‘Global Savings Glut’ speech, and Jaime Caruana in his 2012 speech at
Jackson Hole, both of whom have raised similar concerns to mine, although
from different perspectives.
Before starting, I should disclose my interests in this era of transparency. For
the last few months India has experienced large inflows of capital, not outflows,
and is seen by the markets as an emerging economy that has made some of the
necessary policy adjustments. We are well buffered with substantial reserves,
though no country can be de-coupled from the international system. My remarks
are motivated by the desire for a more stable international system, a system that
works equally for rich and poor, large and small, and not the specifics of our
situation.
UNCONVENTIONAL POLICY
I want to focus on unconventional monetary policies (UMP), by which I mean
both policies that hold interest rates at near zero for long, as well as balance
sheet policies such as quantitative easing or exchange intervention that involve
altering central bank balance sheets in order to affect certain market prices. The
key point that I will emphasize throughout this talk is that quantitative easing
and sustained exchange intervention are in an economic equivalence class,
though the channels they work through may be somewhat different. Our attitudes
towards them should be conditioned by the size of their spillover effects rather
than by any innate legitimacy of either form of intervention.
Let me also add there is a role for unconventional policies – when markets
are broken or grossly dysfunctional, central bankers do have to think
innovatively. Fortunately for the world, much of what they did immediately after
the fall of Lehman was exactly right, though they were making it up as they went
in the face of extreme uncertainty. They eased access to liquidity through
innovative programmes such as Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF), Term Auction Facility (TAF), Troubled Asset Relief Programme
(TARP), Securities Market Programme (SMP), and Long-Term Refinancing
Operation (LTRO). By lending long term without asking too many questions of
the collateral they received, by buying assets beyond usual limits, and by
focusing on repairing markets, they restored liquidity to a world financial system
that would otherwise have been insolvent based on prevailing market asset
prices. In this matter, central bankers are deservedly heroes. (I was not a member
of the fraternity at that time, so I do not feel a conflict in doling out praise!)
The key question is what happens when these policies are prolonged long
beyond repairing markets – and there the benefits are much less clear. Let me list
four concerns:
1) Is unconventional monetary policy the right tool once the immediate
crisis is over? Does it distort behaviour and activity so as to stand in the
way of recovery? Is accommodative monetary policy the way to fix a
crisis that was partly caused by excessively lax policy?
2) Do such policies buy time or does the belief that the central bank is
taking responsibility prevent other, more appropriate, policies from
being implemented? Put differently, when central bankers say, however
reluctantly, that they are the only game in town, do they become the only
game in town?
3) Will exit from unconventional policies be easy?
4) What are the spillovers from such policies to other countries?
Since I have dwelt at length on the first two concerns in an earlier speech, let me
focus on the last two.
EXIT
The macroeconomic argument for prolonged unconventional policy in industrial
countries is that it has low costs, provided inflation stays quiescent. Hence it is
worth pursuing, even if the benefits are uncertain. A number of economists have,
however, raised concerns about financial sector risks that may build with
prolonged use of unconventional policy. Asset prices may not just revert to
earlier levels on exit, but they may overshoot on the downside, and exit can
cause significant collateral damage.
One reason is that leverage may increase both in the financial sector and
amongst borrowers as policy stays accommodative. One channel seems to be
that a boost to asset liquidity leads lenders to believe that asset sales will
backstop loan recovery, leading them to increase loan to value ratios. When
liquidity tightens, though, too many lenders rely on asset sales, causing asset
prices and loan recovery to plummet. Because lenders do not account for the
effects of their lending on the ‘fire sale’ price, and subsequently on lending by
others, they may have an excessive incentive to build leverage. These effects are
exacerbated if, over time, lenders become reliant on asset sales for recovery,
rather than on upfront project evaluation and due diligence. Another possible
channel is that banks themselves become more levered, or equivalently, acquire
more illiquid balance sheets, if the central bank signals it will intervene in a
sustained way when times are tough because unemployment is high.
Leverage need not be the sole reason why exit may be volatile after
prolonged unconventional policy. Investment managers may fear
underperforming relative to others. This means they will hold a risky asset only
if it promises a risk premium (over safe assets) that makes them confident they
will not underperform holding it. A lower path of expected returns on the safe
asset makes it easier for the risky asset to meet the required risk premium, and
indeed draws more investment managers to buy it – the more credible the
forward guidance on ‘low for long’, the more the risk taking. However, as
investment managers crowd into the risky asset, the risky asset is more finely
priced so that the likelihood of possible fire sales increases if the interest rate
environment turns. Every manager dumps the risky asset at that point in order to
avoid being the last one holding it.
Leverage and investor crowding may therefore exacerbate the consequences
of exit. When monetary policy is ultra-accommodative, prudential regulation,
either of the macro or micro kind, is probably not a sufficient defence. In part,
this is because, as Fed Governor Stein so succinctly put it, monetary policy ‘gets
into every crack’, including the unregulated part of the financial system. In part,
ultra accommodative monetary policy creates enormously powerful incentive
distortions whose consequences are typically understood only after the fact. The
consequences of exit, however, are not just felt domestically, they could be
experienced internationally.
SPILLOVERS
Perhaps most vulnerable to the increased risk taking in this integrated world are
countries across the border. When monetary policy in large countries is
extremely and unconventionally accommodative, capital flows into recipient
countries tend to increase local leverage; this is not just due to the direct effect of
cross-border banking flows but also the indirect effect, as the appreciating
exchange rate and rising asset prices, especially of real estate, make it seem that
borrowers have more equity than they really have.
Exchange rate flexibility in recipient countries in these circumstances
sometimes exacerbates booms rather than equilibrates. Indeed, in the recent
episode of emerging market volatility after the Fed started discussing taper in
May 2013, countries that allowed the real exchange rate to appreciate the most
during the prior period of quantitative easing suffered the greatest adverse
impact to financial conditions. Countries that undertake textbook policies of
financial sector liberalization are not immune to the inflows – indeed, their
deeper markets may draw more flows in, and these liquid markets may be where
selling takes place when conditions in advanced economies turn.
Macro-prudential measures have little traction against the deluge of inflows –
Spain had a housing boom despite its countercyclical provisioning. Recipient
countries should adjust, of course, but credit and flows mask the magnitude and
timing of needed adjustment. For instance, higher collections from property
taxes on new houses, sales taxes on new sales, capital gains taxes on financial
asset sales, and income taxes on a more prosperous financial sector may
misleadingly suggest a country’s fiscal house is in order, even while low-risk
premia on sovereign debt add to the sense of calm. At the same time, an
appreciating nominal exchange rate may also keep down inflation.
The difficulty of distinguishing the cyclical from the structural is exacerbated
in some emerging markets where policy commitment is weaker, and the
willingness to succumb to the siren calls of populist policy greater. But it would
be a mistake to think that pro-cyclical policy in the face of capital inflows is
primarily a disease of the poor; Even rich recipient countries with strong
institutions, such as Ireland and Spain, have not been immune to capital-flowinduced fragility.
Ideally, recipient countries would wish for stable capital inflows, and not
flows pushed in by unconventional policy. Once unconventional policies are in
place, however, they do recognize the problems stemming from prolonged easy
money, and thus the need for source countries to exit. But when source countries
move to exit unconventional policies, some recipient countries are leveraged,
imbalanced, and vulnerable to capital outflows. Given that investment managers
anticipate the consequences of the future policy path, even a measured pace of
exit may cause severe market turbulence and collateral damage. Indeed, the
more transparent and well-communicated the exit is, the more certain the foreign
investment managers may be of changed conditions, and the more rapid their
exit from risky positions.
Recipient countries are not being irrational when they protest both the
initiation of unconventional policy as well as an exit whose pace is driven solely
by conditions in the source country. Having become more vulnerable because of
leverage and crowding, recipient countries may call for an exit whose pace and
timing is responsive, at least in part, to conditions they face.
THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL MONETARY POLICY COORDINATION
Hence, my call is for more coordination in monetary policy because I think it
would be an immense improvement over the current international non-system.
International monetary policy coordination, of course, is unpopular among
central bankers, and I therefore have to say why I reiterate the call and what I
mean by it.
I do not mean that central bankers sit around a table and make policy
collectively, nor do I mean that they call each other regularly and coordinate
actions. In its strong form, I propose that large country central banks, both in
advanced countries and emerging markets, internalize more of the spillovers
from their policies in their mandate, and are forced by new conventions on the
‘rules of the game’ to avoid unconventional policies with large adverse spillovers
and questionable domestic benefits. Given the difficulties of operationalizing the
strong form, I suggest that, at the very least, central banks reinterpret their
domestic mandate to take into account other country reactions over time (and not
just the immediate feedback effects), and thus become more sensitive to
spillovers. This weak ‘coordination’ could be supplemented with a reexamination of global safety nets.
THE GAINS FROM COORDINATION
Economists generally converged on the view that the gains to policy
coordination were small provided each country optimized its own policies
keeping in mind the policies of others. The ‘Nash equilibrium’ was not that far
from the global optimum, hence the ‘own house in order’ doctrine was dominant
in the international monetary field. National macroeconomic stability was seen
as sufficient for international macroeconomic stability. The domestic and
international aspects were essentially regarded as two sides of the same coin.
Two factors have led to a rethinking of the doctrine. First, domestic
constraints including political imperatives of bringing unemployment down and
the economic constraint of the zero lower bound may lead monetary policy to be
set at levels different from the unconstrained domestic optimal. Dysfunctional
domestic politics could also contribute in moving monetary policy further from
the unconstrained optimal. In other words, the central bank, responding to a
variety of political pressures and weaknesses, may stray away from even the
constrained optimal – towards third best policies rather than second best policies.
Second, cross-border capital flows can lead to a more dramatic transmission of
policies, driven by agency (and other) considerations that do not necessarily
relate to economic conditions in the recipient countries.
One argument along these lines is that if some large country adopts
unconventional and highly accommodative sub-optimal policies, other countries
may follow suit to avoid exchange rate appreciation in a world with weak
demand. As a result, the policy equilibrium may establish at rates that are too
low compared to that warranted by the global optimal. Another argument is that
when the sending country is at the zero lower bound, and the receiving country
responds to capital inflows with aggressive reserve accumulation, both may be
better off with more moderate policies. Indeed, it may well be that coordination
may allow policy makers political room to move away from sub-optimal
policies. If political paralysis and consequent fiscal tightening forces a source
country to a sub-optimal reliance on monetary stimulus, policy coordination that
allows for expanded demand elsewhere could allow the source country to cut
back on its dependence on monetary stimulus.
DOMESTIC OPTIMAL IS CLOSE TO THE GLOBAL OPTIMAL
Despite these arguments, official statements by multilateral institutions such as
the IMF continue to endorse unconventional monetary policies while
downplaying the adverse spillover effects to other countries. Indeed, in an
excellent analysis of the obstacles to international policy coordination, the IMF’s
own Jonathan Ostry and Atish Ghosh argue that ‘impartial’ international policy
assessments by multilateral entities could be suspected of bias
‘…if there were a systematic tendency of the assessor to identify a change in policy (tighter fiscal
policy; looser monetary policy; structural reform) as always yielding welfare gains at the national and
global levels. This would breed suspicion because the base case should be that countries do not fail to
exploit available welfare gains…it is implausible that welfare gains at the national and global levels
should always be positively correlated…’
By downplaying the adverse effects of cross-border monetary transmission of
unconventional policies, we are overlooking the elephant in the post-crisis room.
I see two dangers here. One is that any remaining rules of the game are breaking
down. Our collective endorsement of unconventional monetary policies
essentially says it is okay to distort asset prices if there are other domestic
constraints to reviving growth, such as the zero lower bound. But net spillovers,
rather than fancy acronyms, should determine internationally acceptable policy.
Otherwise, countries could legitimately practice what they might call
quantitative external easing or QEE, whereby they intervene to keep their
exchange rate down and build huge reserves. The reason we frowned on QEE in
the past is because we believed the adverse spillover effects for the rest of the
world were significant. If we are unwilling, however, to evaluate all policies
based on their spillover effects, there is no legitimate way multilateral
institutions can declare that QEE contravenes the rules of the game. Indeed,
some advanced economy central bankers have privately expressed their worry to
me that QE ‘works’ primarily by altering exchange rates, which makes it
different from QEE only in degree rather than in kind.
The second danger is a mismanaged exit will prompt fresh distortionary
behaviour. Even as source country central banks go to great pains to
communicate how their removal of accommodation will be contingent on
domestic activity, they have been silent on how they will respond to foreign
turmoil. Market participants conclude that recipient countries, especially those
that do not belong to large reserve currency blocks, are on their own, and crowd
devastatingly through the exit.
Indeed, the lesson some emerging markets will take away from the recent
episode of turmoil is (i) don’t expand domestic demand and run large deficits (ii)
maintain a competitive exchange rate (iii) build large reserves, because when
trouble comes, you are on your own. In a world with deficient aggregate
demand, is this the message the international community wants to send?
For this is not the first episode in which capital has been pushed first in one
direction and then in another, each time with devastating effect. In the early
1990s, rates were held low in the United States, and capital flowed to emerging
markets. The wave of emerging market crises starting with Mexico in 1994 and
ending with Argentina in 2001, sweeping through East Asia and Russia in
between, was partially caused by a reversal of these flows as interest rates rose
in industrial countries. The subsequent reserve build-up in emerging markets,
including China, contributed to weak global demand and excess spending by
some industrial countries, culminating in the global financial crisis of 2007-09.
Once again, though, post-crisis unconventional monetary policy has pushed
capital to emerging markets, with the associated build-up in fragility. Are we
setting the stage for a resumption of the ‘global savings glut’ as emerging
markets build reserves once again?
Two obvious remedies suggest themselves; less extreme monetary policies
on all sides with some thought given to adverse spillover effects when setting
policy, and better global safety nets to mitigate the need for countries to selfinsure through reserve buffers.
MORE MODERATE POLICY
Even though we live in a world where monetary transmission is global, policy
focus is local. Central banks mount a number of defences as to why they should
not take full account of spillovers. One way to demonstrate the weaknesses in
the usual arguments that are put forward to defend the status quo is to see how
they would sound if they were used to defend QEE, that is, sustained
intervention in the exchange market to keep the exchange rate competitive.
Defence 1: We are a developing country and we are mandated to support growth.
Institutional constraints in enhancing productivity, and our vulnerability to
sudden stops, means that a competitive exchange rate, and thus QEE, is essential
to fulfilling our mandate.
Defence 2: Would the world not be better off if we grew strongly? QEE is
essential to our growth.
Defence 3: We take into account feedback effects to our economy from the rest
of the world while setting policy. Therefore, we are not oblivious to the
consequences of QEE on other countries.
Defence 4: Monetary policy with a domestic focus is already very complicated
and hard to communicate. It would be impossibly complex if we were
additionally burdened with having to think about the effects of QEE on other
countries.
There are many problems with these defences that those who have
complained about currency manipulation will recognize. Currency manipulation
may help growth in the short run (even this is debatable) but creates long-run
distortions that hurt the manipulating country. There are more sensible policies
to foster growth. And even if a central bank has a purely domestic mandate, the
country’s international responsibilities do not allow it to arbitrarily impose costs
on the rest of the world. The net spillover effects need to be estimated, and it
cannot be taken for granted that the positive spillovers from the initiating
country’s growth (say through greater trade) more than offset the adverse
spillovers to other countries. Feedback effects to the source country represent
only a small part of the spillover effects experienced by the world, and a central
bank will be far from implementing the globally optimal policy if it is solely
domestically oriented, even if it takes these feedback effects into account.
Countries are required to pay attention to the effects of their policies on others,
no matter how much the added complication, because we all have international
responsibilities.
Of course, the reader will recognize that each one of these arguments has
been made defending unconventional monetary policy. Yet multilateral
institutions treat sustained currency intervention with great opprobrium while
giving unconventional monetary policy a clean chit. Should the cleanliness of
the chit not depend on the size of the net spillovers and the competitive response
it engenders? Without estimating them carefully, how can we tell?
OPERATIONALIZING COORDINATION: SOME SUGGESTIONS
We need to break away from this cycle of unconventional policies and
competitive monetary easing. Already, the events of recent months have set the
stage for renewed reserve accumulation by the emerging markets. And this time,
it will be harder for advanced economies to complain if they downplay their own
spillover effects while they are pushing for recovery.
AN INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR
In an ideal world, unconventional monetary policies such as QE or QEE should
be vetted by an independent assessor for their spillover effects. The assessment
procedure is easy to visualize; Perhaps following a complaint by an impacted
country (as in the WTO), the independent assessor could analyse the effects of
such policies and come to a judgment on whether they follow the rules of the
game. Policies where the benefits are largely domestic, while the costs fall
largely abroad, would be especially carefully scrutinized. And if the assessor
deems the policy reduces global welfare, international pressure should be
applied to stop such policies.
The problems with such an idealistic process are easy to see. Where is such
an impartial assessor to be found? The staff at multilateral institutions is
excellent, and well capable of independent judgment. But political pressure
subsequent to the initial assessment operates unevenly. Initial assessments
typically remain unaltered when a small country complains (no country likes
independent assessments), but are often toned down when a large economy
protests. There are many exceptions to this, but more work is needed to build
trust in the impartiality of assessments of multilateral institutions.
Even if multilateral organizations become immune to power politics, they are
not immune to cognitive capture. Their staff has been persuaded by the same
models and frameworks as the staff of industrial country central banks – models
where monetary policy is an extremely powerful tool to elevate activity, and
exchange rate flexibility does wonders in insulating countries from the most
debilitating spillovers. ‘Decoupling’ is always possible in such models, even
though the evidence is that the models typically underestimate the extent of
‘coupling’. Indeed, many of these models do not have realistic models of credit,
or of monetary transmission in an economy with debt overhang, which reduces
their value considerably. Progress is being made but it will take time.
And, of course, even if a truly independent assessment came to the
conclusion that certain policies were in violation, how would such a judgment be
enforced?
The reality is that the rules of the game were framed in a different era to deter
competitive devaluations and currency manipulation. They have not been
updated for today’s world of more varied competitive easing. But it is unclear
that even if they were updated, they could be assessed and enforced in the
current environment.
A MORE MODEST PROPOSAL
Perhaps, then, it would be better to settle for a more modest proposal. Central
banks should assess spillover effects from their own actions, not just in terms of
immediate feedback, but also in terms of medium-term feedback as other
countries alter their policies. In other words, the source country should not just
worry about the immediate flows of capital to other countries from its policies,
but the longer run reaction such as sustained exchange intervention that this
would bring about. This would allow central banks to pay more attention to
spillovers even while staying within their domestic mandate.
For example, this would mean that while exiting from unconventional
policies, central banks would pay attention to conditions in emerging markets
also while deciding the timing of moves, while keeping the overall direction of
moves tied to domestic conditions. Their policy statements should acknowledge
such concerns. To be concrete in a specific case, the Fed postponing tapering in
September 2013 allowed emerging economies more time to adjust after the
initial warning in May 2013. Whatever the underlying rationale for
postponement, it helped set the stage for tapering start smoothly in December
2013, without disrupting markets. In contrast, with volatility hitting emerging
markets after the Argentinian problems in January 2014, the Fed policy
statement in January 2014, with no mention of concern about the emerging
market situation, and with no indication Fed policy would be sensitive to
conditions in those markets in the future, sent the probably unintended message
that those markets were on their own. Speeches by regional Fed presidents
emphasizing the Fed’s domestic mandate did not help. Since then, Fed
communication has been more nuanced, though the real challenge in
communication lies ahead when policy rates have to move up.
INTERNATIONAL SAFETY NETS
Emerging economies have to work to reduce vulnerabilities in their economies,
to get to the point where, like Australia, they can allow exchange rate flexibility
to do much of the adjustment for them to capital inflows. But the needed
institutions take time to develop. In the meantime, the difficulty for emerging
markets in absorbing large amounts of capital quickly and in a stable way should
be seen as a constraint, much like the zero lower bound, rather than something
that can be altered quickly. Even while resisting the temptation of absorbing
flows, they will look to safety nets.
So another way to prevent a repeat of substantial reserve accumulation is to
build stronger international safety nets. As the financial crisis suggested, this is
not just an emerging economy concern. In a world where international liquidity
can dry up quickly, the world needs bilateral, regional, and multilateral
arrangements for liquidity. Multilateral arrangements are tried and tested, and are
available more widely, and without some of the possible political pressures that
could arise from bilateral and regional arrangements. Indeed swap arrangements
can be channelled through multilateral institutions like the IMF instead of being
conducted on a bilateral basis, so that the multilateral institution bears any
(small) credit risk, and the source central bank does not have to justify the
arrangements to its political authorities.
Perhaps equally valuable would be a liquidity line from the IMF, where
countries are pre-qualified by the IMF and told (perhaps privately) how much of
a line they would qualify for under current policy – with the size of the available
line revised annually after the IMF’s assessment and any curtailment becoming
effective six months later so as to give a country time to adjust policies to qualify
for higher limits, or to find alternative arrangements. Access to the line would
get activated by the IMF Board in a situation of generalized liquidity shortage
(as, for example, when policy tightening in source countries after an extended
period of low rates causes investment managers to become risk averse). The IMF
has suggested such arrangements in a discussion paper, and they should be
explored because they allow countries access to liquidity without the stigma of
approaching the Fund, and without the conditionality that accompanies most
Fund arrangements.
Clearly, the Fund’s resources will be safe only if the situation is one of
genuine temporary illiquidity rather than one where countries need significant
reforms to regain market access. Equally clearly, access will vary across
countries, and prolonged use after the liquidity emergency is declared over will
necessitate an IMF programme. Nevertheless, the twin proposals of the Global
Stability Mechanism and Short-term Liquidity Line that the IMF Board has
examined in the past deserve close examination for they come closest to
genuinely helping offset reserve build-up.
Finally, it would be a useful exercise for the Fund, in a period of growing
vulnerability to capital flow reversals, to identify those countries that do not
have own, bilateral, regional, or multilateral liquidity arrangements to fall back
on, and to work to improve their access to some safety net. The role of honest
ex-ante marriage broker may be one that could prove to be immensely important
when the interest rate environment changes.
CONCLUSION
The current non-system in international monetary policy is, in my view, a source
of substantial risk, both to sustainable growth as well as to the financial sector. It
is not an industrial country problem, nor an emerging market problem, it is a
problem of collective action. We are being pushed towards competitive monetary
easing.
If I use terminology reminiscent of the Depression era non-system, it is
because I fear that in a world with weak aggregate demand, we may be engaged
in a futile competition for a greater share of it. In the process, unlike Depressionera policies, we are also creating financial sector and cross-border risks that
exhibit themselves when unconventional policies come to an end. There is no
use saying that everyone should have anticipated the consequences. As the
former Bank of International Settlements (BIS) General Manager Andrew
Crockett put it, ‘financial intermediaries are better at assessing relative risks at a
point in time, than projecting the evolution of risk over the financial cycle.’
A first step to prescribing the right medicine is to recognize the cause of the
sickness. Extreme monetary easing, in my view, is more cause than medicine.
The sooner we recognize that, the more sustainable world growth we will have.
T
CHAPTER 9
RBI MATTERS
I
Perhaps the most energizing aspect of my term at the Reserve Bank was the opportunity to work with
some of the most dedicated professionals I have met in my life, the staff of the Reserve Bank. The
average quality of people was high by even international standards, let alone public sector standards,
the organization took pride in its work, and it had a great tradition of comradery and community. The
younger staff of the RBI were from a broad variety of schools and backgrounds, truly representative of
Indian diversity. They were enthusiastic, and eager to work and learn. I soon realized that when I set a
group a task, they would invariably rise to the occasion and produce high quality work. On the 80
anniversary of the RBI on 1 April 2015, this is the message I sent my colleagues.
Remarks on RBI’s 80th Anniversary
he Reserve Bank of India is eighty years old today. Eighty years is a long
time in the life of a human, one which people in the south celebrate with a
Sathabhishekham, but it is not a long time in the life of an institution.
Nevertheless much has happened since the year 1935 when the Reserve Bank
was set up to ‘regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves with
the view to securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the
currency and credit system of the country to its advantage’.
India was then under British rule, and the first Governor, Sir Osborne Smith,
was an Australian. But the RBI was certainly not a British institution, and has
been working right from the outset for Indian economic interests. It has also
nurtured Indian talent. In 1943, Chintaman Dwarkanath Deshmukh, one of our
finest financial minds, was appointed as the first Indian governor of the Reserve
Bank. Not only did he represent India at the Bretton Woods conference, he also
went on to become one of its longest serving finance ministers. Amongst the
problems he had to confront was how to deal respectfully but firmly with the
debts the colonial power had accumulated to India during World War II.
Over the years, the Reserve Bank has been blessed with a number of such
fine leaders, a reflection also of the importance the government places in having
a strong central bank. The list of past governors and deputy governors reads like
a who’s who of the Indian economic establishment, with governors like Benegal
Rama Rau, M. Narasimham, Dr I.G. Patel, Dr Manmohan Singh, Dr C.
Rangarajan, Dr Bimal Jalan, Dr Y.V. Reddy, and Dr D. Subbarao, ably assisted
by Deputy Governors such as S.S. Tarapore, Vepa Kamesan, Dr Rakesh Mohan,
Shyamala Gopinath, Usha Thorat, and Dr Subir Gokarn. The RBI’s board has
also been superb, with people like Sir Purshottamdas Thakurdas and Yezdi
Malegam guiding it.
Interestingly, many of the governors were from the administrative services,
with only one, M. Narasimham, from the RBI itself. Nevertheless, all understood
that the Reserve Bank’s role is to safeguard the monetary and financial stability
of the country even while working towards its financial development. There has
always been a healthy dialogue between the government and the Bank, informed
by their respective time horizons and attitudes towards risk. And invariably, as
history records, successive governments have appreciated the wisdom of the
Reserve Bank’s counsel.
No institution is bigger than the people who work for it. If the Reserve Bank
is respected today, it is because of the many thousands who have worked over
the years for the Bank, with capability and dedication. Let me recognize two as
representative of the many. Rani Durve, a DGM in the Bhopal office, has created
numerous films, books, and street plays on themes such as fictitious emails and
excessive interest rates so as to educate and alert the public. Nirmal Pattnayak,
an AGM in the Department of Information Technology, enabled the pan-India
electronic transfer of funds for government departments through the national
electronic payment systems, thus overnight making the government a significant
user of these systems. Both have gone beyond the ordinary call of duty, but so do
many others in the Bank.
Equally commendable is the general integrity of the staff. It is a matter of
great pride for me today that when someone enters our building to persuade us to
change a regulation, they come armed not with money but with arguments about
what is right.
Strong national institutions are difficult to build. Therefore existing ones
should be nurtured from the outside, and constantly rejuvenated from the inside,
for there are precious few of them. Rejuvenation means constantly thinking
about how we can do better in serving the people of this country. Whether we
contribute by speeding up files we are sitting on, curtailing expenses,
simplifying paperwork and regulations, doing innovative research, or working
cooperatively with colleagues, there are many ways we all can do our bit. I ask
you to join me in rededicating ourselves in the 81st year of this great institution
to ensure that the Reserve Bank of India continues to help the nation secure
prosperity and economic opportunity for all.
D
II
While I was very proud of the Bank, there was room for improvement. We embarked on a serious
internal reorganization, intended to streamline the organization. We also revamped the performanceevaluation system, and worked to improve the skill-assessment and skill-building processes. All these
changes were designed by senior management, without the involvement of outside consultants, so that
the organization would own the changes. There were no public speeches on all this, but some of this
did become public: Every year-end, I wrote a letter to our staff. While this was meant to be an internal
communication, the following letter was leaked piece-meal to the press (reflecting the adage that
nothing the RBI Governor says or writes is secret). Unfortunately, what leaked out were primarily my
reflections on the scope for improvement (suggesting that was newsworthy) and not my sense of what
was working well. I reproduce it in its entirety because it is already in the public domain.
Year-end Letter to RBI Staff, 31 December 2015
ear Colleagues:
I wish all of you and your loved ones a very happy, healthy, and
fulfilling New Year. I hope you spent some time with your families and friends
in the last week of the year.
The last year has been full of actions and accomplishments by our
colleagues. I will not catalogue them here – I trust you have followed the
developments in the newspapers, and will read an overall detailed view in our
annual report. I am confident that based on the compliments I hear from the
public about our staff’s professionalism and integrity, our ability to continue
recruiting the highest quality talent into our staff will be maintained. I continue
to be impressed by the dedication and capabilities of many of our staff – most
recently, a team of regulators and supervisors that has worked tirelessly over the
last few months, foregoing numerous holidays, on the very important task of
cleaning up bank balance sheets.
Nevertheless, a strong organization relies on continuous self-examination in
order to stay at high levels of excellence. In the coming months, we will have the
occasion to have a dialogue through town hall meetings. Let me, however, flag
some areas of strength as well as those of concern.
EFFECTIVE SERVICE
We are a service organization. We have customers, whether they are the
regulated organizations, the public, or the government. We need to serve them
effectively and efficiently. By and large, our staff members perform well, with a
few committed extraordinary individuals going way beyond the call of duty.
Nevertheless, if I press the stakeholders I meet, I do hear criticisms. Our
regulations are not always very clear, our staff sometimes is neither well
informed about our own regulations nor willing to help the customer, our
responses are occasionally extraordinarily slow and bureaucratic (in the sense of
hiding behind opaque rules or avoiding a decision rather than taking a sensible
course of action). The imagery that comes to mind for critics is of a traditional,
unimaginative organization rather than a dynamic, intelligent one.
We are working on streamlining our regulations in the new master
documents, and trying to weed out old historical ones. We need to continue to
improve the language in them so that every concerned person can understand
without much effort the letter and spirit of what we want to say. Simple-tounderstand regulations will be a benefit to our staff also, especially those who
are new to a department, because they can come up to speed quickly. We also
need to build a library of cases that will help us understand how similar
questions were dealt with in the past, that is, we need to build institutional
memory rather than let crucial experiences get carried away into retirement in
individual memories. This requires experts in departments to document their
knowledge, especially as they get ready to leave. Indeed, one could visualize a
process of documentation and debriefing as an essential part of the transfer
process. We also need to streamline all our forms and put the bulk of filing
online, with unique customer ids so that repetitive filling of common details is
eliminated. Finally, we need to adhere to timelines. We are in the process of
tracking response times. We hope to see concrete measures during the coming
year on bringing them down where necessary.
CULTURE OF COMPLIANCE
It has often been said that India is a weak state. Not only are we accused of not
having the administrative capacity of ferreting out wrongdoing, we do not punish
the wrongdoer – unless he is small and weak. This belief feeds on itself. No one
wants to go after the rich and well-connected wrongdoer, which means they get
away with even more. If we are to have strong sustainable growth, this culture of
impunity should stop. Importantly, this does not mean being against riches or
business, as some would like to portray, but being against wrongdoing.
As the premier and most respected regulator in the country, we should take
the lead. We have motivated staff with the highest integrity at every level. Yet
there is a sense that we do not enforce compliance. Are we allowing regulated
entities to get away year after year with poor practices even though these are
noted during inspections/scrutinies? Should we become more intolerant of
sloppy practices at regulated entities, so that these do not result in massive scams
years later? Should we haul up accountants who do not flag issues they should
detect? My sense is that we need a continuing conversation about tightening both
detection as well as penalties for non-compliance throughout the hierarchy. We
cannot be seen as a paper tiger. We are changing our attitude towards
compliance, but this is work in progress.
SELF-EXAMINATION AND MUTUAL SUPPORT
If we demand more of the regulated, we should not be found wanting ourselves.
As with all organizations, we are reliant on a few stalwarts who carry the
organization on their broad shoulders. These are the best performers. There is a
second tier that exceeds the needs of the job through their effort or their
capabilities, but they fall a little short of being truly excellent. A third tier
consists of time-servers, for whom the job is a source of livelihood but who have
lost the desire to excel. They put in a reasonable day’s work, but not an ounce
more than what is demanded of them. And then there are those who are
overwhelmed by the work or who have lost any desire to perform. I have
encountered all these types at the Bank.
Unfortunately, our performance-evaluation system did not help us identify
who needed motivation and improvement, and how they could be helped to do
so. Almost everyone was deemed excellent, ranging from those who gave their
heart and soul for the Bank to those who shirked all responsibility or duty.
We need to change this, to reward those who perform and to help those who
do not. The new performance-evaluation system is meant to aid in this. We do
realize there were shortcomings in the initial round, as there will be with every
new system. We are working to fix them. But please do not attribute a lower than
normal rating for yourself to a shortcoming in the process. There may be
information in the rating that you should take seriously. As an organization, if we
do not subject ourselves to serious self-examination and continue to pretend
everyone is working fine, let me assure you that the organization cannot become
better than what it is now. We need to continuously review and renew ourselves
if we have to compete with the best in the world.
In the coming year, much will be demanded of reporting officers. They need
to let their subordinates know, perhaps even as frequently as every quarter, how
their performance has been, and even informally document this discussion. The
final performance appraisal should differentiate good from bad performance, and
should not come as a surprise to the person being evaluated – they should have
picked up cues during the year. Subordinates who are not getting regular
feedback should ask their reporting officers. This means more work for all, but it
will be critical in helping us improve.
Let me highlight an issue that especially concerns me. As I sit through
promotion interviews, I am worried that people are losing curiosity, the desire to
learn and improve themselves. I am concerned that some people do not read
outside the papers that come across their desk, that they have no idea of other
branches of the Bank and their work, let alone the wider world. We emphasize
specialization, but that does not mean there is no need to read the newspapers, let
alone magazines and books. This has to change if the organization is to remain
vibrant. In complacency and self-satisfaction lies a slow descent into mediocrity.
We do want to revamp the support we give our staff to learn. We intend to
invest in our staff on a continuing basis, as evidenced by the expansion in
Golden Jubilee fellowships. The coming year will be focused on revamping the
Human Resource Department’s efforts to assess individual needs and career
plans and provide the necessary skill building. We want more of one’s career in
the Bank to be self-driven rather than driven by the needs of the Bank – though a
mix of the two will always be inevitable, it is best when the two coincide. Senior
management would appreciate any suggestions and ideas that you may have in
this regard.
COMMUNICATION AND COOPERATION
I have made this point before, and will make it again. We need to improve
channels of communication within the Bank, both horizontally and vertically.
The Bank cannot afford to be divided into silos – too much of our work cuts
across departmental boundaries. For managers, better communication means
more willingness to meet in person or by video conference/phone/email than by
interdepartmental memos and file pushing. It means fast responses to the queries
that come to your desk, recognizing that cooperation will be amply repaid. It
means regular meetings with staff to address their questions.
For staff, it means being willing to ask questions and resolve anxieties when
you have face-to-face meetings with managers, rather than be silent at that time
and then succumbing to unfounded rumours floated by vested interests who want
to prey on your anxieties. It is always fun to concoct conspiracy theories, and we
Indians often prefer them to more mundane explanations. However, management
in the Bank is open, and one only needs to ask to get the facts.
We also need to communicate better with the outside. This means that we
should get ahead of the press, rather than be reactive. If we want to highlight
achievements or regulations, we should prepare a press release to focus the press
on what is important – with the release getting to the point quickly rather than
starting with pages of irrelevant history. Press releases are best done at or before
5.30 pm if you want it to show up in the papers. Beyond that, reporters do not
have the time to write copy for the next day, and the news is too old for the day
after.
Some in the Bank disdain communication. ‘Why not let our achievements
speak for themselves?’ they might say. Unfortunately, in this world where the
press is more attentive and the public more hungry for news, we either should
shape news or we will be shaped by it. The latter is infinitely more unpleasant –
some may recall the way we were termed anti-technology for some actions we
took against a taxi company.
FLEXIBILITY
Successful organizations are usually vibrant and flexible. They adapt to
circumstances. As we confront the challenges ahead, we need to be flexible. At
one level, this means seizing opportunities that are thrown up by the expanding
Indian economy. For example, the new function of gathering market intelligence,
which feeds into State-level Coordination Committees, was a dynamic response
to our inability to regulate all the operators who attempted to take advantage of
regulatory vacuums. Going forward, we need to create regulatory capacity to
monitor new entities like the internet market places that are also getting into
lending.
While we should be wary of regulatory overreach, we must also recognize
that if we do not expand our responsibilities, others will fill them. That is not
always a bad thing, but if new regulators lead to a Balkanization of regulation
and many regulatory gaps, the system will be worse off. So let us be prepared to
step up where necessary instead of assuming others will take responsibility.
But this also means we should be prepared to hire new capabilities into the
organization. While we will look for home grown talent where possible, we need
lateral entry in some areas. We will minimize these areas, but if we are as good
as we think we are, we should be prepared to see some lateral entry wherever
necessary – provided internal people have a fair chance to compete for the jobs.
This is one area where I feel protectionist attitudes in the organization are strong
and require to be debated.
EMBEDDED IN THE COMMUNITY
Finally, we are embedded in a changing community. What was okay in the past
is no longer all right when the public demands transparency and better
governance from public organizations. I am glad to report that henceforth our
budget will be approved by our Central Board. Our dividend policy is currently
being debated with the government, but we intend to make it rule-based using
cutting edge principles, so that the stability of the Bank is protected, even while
the government gets all possible dividends from ownership. We also intend to
improve the Board’s oversight of wage and perquisite negotiations. Transparency
and good governance are ways to protect ourselves from roving enquiries –
everyone should recognize that an effective regulator has enemies, and like
Caesar’s wife, should be above all suspicion.
We also need to pay attention to the demands of the community. While it
would be hard to argue that our profits net of reserves belong to anybody other
than the government, which is already in the business of public and community
service, we can conduct CSR out of our own personal funds. I am proud that our
employees have agreed to donate significant amounts to the various tragedies
that have hit the country, most recently in Chennai, by giving up a day’s leave
encashment. I am even prouder of our regional offices that have risen to the
occasion when faced with calamity, and ensured banking services keep
functioning, even while their own families were facing difficulties. I am told that
our medical officers in Chennai provided vital public services in the days after
the floods. This is truly commendable, but only consistent with the community
spirit that courses through our organization.
We have also committed to working for a cleaner India. Let us set an
example by cleaning up our environment, whether it is at the office or in our
colonies, or even outside, in our communities. We need to revitalize our Swachh
Bharat efforts in the Bank to meet the challenge set out by our Prime Minister.
Let me end by saying we are all privileged to be working for such a fine
institution, an institution that compensates well and gives us challenging work
even while giving us the fulfilment of doing public service. If I have pointed out
areas where we can improve, it is because I believe to do otherwise would be to
do this great organization a disservice. In a similar vein, I would like you to
point out where we in senior management can improve. Ideas and suggestions,
as well as constructive criticism, should flow both up and down if we are to stay
dynamic.
Let me wish everyone a Happy New Year once again.
T
III
The quality and integrity of the RBI’s staff is a national treasure that we should do everything to
preserve. On the internal front, my biggest regret is that I could not solve a long-pending matter that I
inherited from my predecessors: securing for retired RBI staff the same pension benefits that
government employees enjoy, despite repeated assurances from the government that the matter would
be addressed. I hope the government will do the right thing here.
The Reserve Bank, perhaps because of its competence and integrity, is called upon to do a lot.
Moreover, because it is the primary institution safeguarding our monetary and financial security, it has
to say no to a lot of powerful people with significant interests. All this means there are perpetual
battles with those who disagree with RBI policy, and who believe the easiest way to change policy is
not to persuade the RBI but to take away its powers. I did not think the RBI needed all the powers it
had, nor did it have all the powers it needed, but I was wary of suggestions for change that were not
accompanied by sound rationale. I feared that without such rationales, we might be giving in to
motivated interests (who wanted a less competent regulator) or power grabs (from those in government
who wanted to expand turf) or the RBI might become a scapegoat (as we were entrusted with tasks that
could not possibly be accomplished).
I mentioned earlier that committee reports are the way to initiate change in government. The
legitimacy of committee reports, of course, varies, especially if they are driven by a specific agenda or
by interested parties. A vast quantity of underlying research can mask the fact that many policy
recommendations are ultimately just opinions, unsupported by research. The Financial Sector
Legislative Reforms Committee (FSLRC) report, commissioned by the finance ministry in the UPA
government, recommended enormous changes to the financial system. Some recommendations were
very useful and well-thought-out, but my fellow regulators and I had serious concerns about the
practicality of, and rationale for, other recommendations, and whether they were really connected to
the research that underlay the report. Here, the biases of some of those who commissioned the report or
the drafters, rather than a reasoned consensus among all members, seemed to be coming through. Few
realized that the report was submitted with a large number of recorded dissents to its final draft. With
pressure building to implement it without a consensus being reached with regulators – as if it was the
law of the land rather than simply another report – I thought it was important to air some of our
concerns and I did so in a speech in June 2014. I had to be diplomatic, but also raise the right
questions.
Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee
Report (FSLRC): What to Do and When?
he Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee (FSLRC) Report is one
of the most important, well-researched, as well as well-publicized reports in
Indian financial history. It not only lays out the functions of the financial sector
and how it should be structured, but also how legislation and regulation
governing it ought to look like. The authors of this report truly have to be
commended for their national service.
There is much to like and agree with in the report. In laying out the need for
consumer protection, raising the issue of whether products sold are suitable for
the target customer, and putting the onus on the financial institution to determine
suitability, the report has forced regulators to review their consumer protection
frameworks. We at the RBI are indeed engaged in such an exercise, informed by
the valuable guidelines in the FSLRC report.
There is more of great value. The FSLRC wants law not to micromanage,
and prefers to give regulators more leeway. This is indeed important as the world
we regulate changes faster than the pace at which legislation can change. The
FSLRC’s emphasis on the need for a clear monetary framework culminated in
the Dr Urjit Patel Committee report, which will guide our thinking in the years
to come. Similarly, its focus on creating new institutions like the Financial
Resolution Authority to fill gaps in our institutional structure is much needed.
I could go on. But I come here not to praise the FSLRC Report, but to argue
that it would be a mistake to implement some proposals in the report today. For
some proposals, the underlying logic is questionable, and seems to go against the
very rationale of regulation. In other cases, the proposals make more sense for an
economy where the regulatory framework is more developed and the judiciary
more seasoned in matters financial. To implement the proposals now would be to
tie the system up in knots. Let me explain.
THE LOGIC FOR REGULATION
The logic for regulation according to the FSLRC is to deal with market failure
or, more colloquially, bad behaviour. The committee talks about incomplete
information or poor incentives as a reason for bad behaviour, but one of the most
important reasons for bad behaviour necessitating regulation is what economists
call incomplete contracts; that the behaviour of the regulated entity (vis-à-vis
customers, the public at large, the taxpayer, or the market) cannot be completely
specified in contracts because it is too difficult to observe or verify in real time,
or it can only be gauged across many contracts.
While courts can enforce specific contracts, the regulator can sometimes do
better. For instance, a bank may attract a lot of complaints from its credit card
customers. While no single customer may think the case worth taking to court,
and while no customer may be able to prove the bank was in the wrong, the large
number of complaints will suggest to the regulator that the bank needs to shape
up. By comparing the nature of the complaints it gets from this bank’s customers
with the complaints it gets from other banks, the regulator can gauge what is
wrong and act. Similarly, if a particular product attracts a lot more complaints
than other products, the regulator can ask the industry to modify the product
appropriately, or even ban it.
A regulator may also have to prevent certain forms of contracting – such as
the exotic securities that emerged before the financial crisis. If the regulator
thinks a certain kind of security will impose undue systemic risks on the system,
he can ban it, even though the security would have traded amongst consenting
adults. While he has no proof that the security will behave as he thinks it will, he
cannot wait till the risks occur, for it may be too late.
The broader point is that a lot of regulatory action is about the sound exercise
of judgment by the regulator based on years of experience. In doing so, he fills
in the gaps in laws, contracts, and even regulations. Not everything the regulator
does can be proven in a court of law. Courts do not interfere in the specific
decisions of a corporate board – using the business judgment rule, they do not
second guess business decisions, and only pull up boards when there is a
violation of the legal process of arriving at a decision. In the same way, there are
a range of regulatory decisions where regulatory judgment should not be second
guessed.
THE DANGER OF EXCESSIVE LEGAL OVERSIGHT
Yet the FSLRC wants almost everything the regulator does, not just the framing
of regulation but also the exercise of regulatory judgment, to be subject to legal
appeal. For that, it wants to create a Financial Sector Appellate Tribunal. The
intent is to place more checks and balances on regulatory actions (note that most
regulatory actions can already be appealed in high court). But how much
checking and balancing is enough, and can legal oversight become excessive?
There are three dangers we have to guard against. The first is to ask courts to
make judgments that they simply do not have the capability, experience, or
information to make, and where precise evidence may be lacking. If we attempt
to do this, we will undermine the very purpose of a regulator. Of course, one
could trust the good sense of the tribunal to follow a ‘regulatory judgment’ rule
and not intervene in a broad array of matters, but does this not imply a double
standard – we trust the tribunal’s judgment but not the regulator. More likely,
though, past experience suggests that entities like to justify their existence, and if
set up, a tribunal will intervene more than necessary.
A second danger is that easing the appellate process will invite appeal. In a
developed country with well-established regulations, a case history of
judgments, and speedy courts, this would not be a problem. In India, where the
financial system is developing and many new regulations have to be framed
(more so if we move to a principles-based approach for legislation), while the
judiciary will have a significant amount of learning to do even while judicial
processes have been slow, the encouragement to appeal could paralyse the
system and create distortions, as needed regulations are held up and participants
exploit loopholes.
Finally, in every country, a healthy respect for the regulator serves to keep
participants on the straight and narrow. In a developing country, where private
behaviour is less constrained by norms or institutions, this is especially
important. But to the extent that private parties with their high-priced lawyers
can check the regulator, that healthy respect dissipates. So the final danger is that
the regulator could become a paper tiger, and lose his power of influencing good
behaviour, even in areas that are not subject to judicial review.
Am I arguing that no checks and balances are needed? Certainly not! But
there are already checks and balances in place, including the fact that high courts
can review regulatory decisions and that the regulator is appointed, and can be
removed, by democratically elected representatives of the people. The FSLRC
recommends an annual report to parliament, as well as regular discussions with
parliamentarians. These are good suggestions, which would add to oversight.
But I would strongly urge the government not to draw parallels to other
regulated sectors and tie the financial regulator with further judicial oversight
under a misplaced sense that this is the path to financial development.
REGULATORY ARCHITECTURE
Another area where the FSLRC has strong views is on regulatory architecture.
As I said earlier, some of its suggestions here are much needed, including the
Financial Resolution Authority. But the logic for some of the suggested changes
is weak, and sometimes inconsistent.
Let us take the suggestion to merge all regulation of trading under a new
Unified Financial Agency. So the Forward Markets Commission as well as the
bond regulation activities currently undertaken by the RBI would move, as
would SEBI. But this assumes that the central regulatory synergy is the fact that
the instrument is traded. But could other synergies exist? And how important are
they?
For instance, in forward trading where a real commodity is delivered,
regulatory oversight over real markets for the commodity where price is
discovered, as well as over warehouses where the commodity is delivered, may
be an important source of regulatory synergy. Should the FMC be subsumed
under the Unified Financial Agency or be better off having stronger links to the
ministries overseeing the real commodities? I think the answer needs more
investigation.
Similarly, is the regulation of bond trading more synergistic with the
regulation of other debt products such as bank loans and with the operation of
monetary policy (where bonds are traded) or with other forms of trading? Once
again, I am not sure we have a compelling answer in the FSLRC report. My
personal view is that moving the regulation of bond trading at this time would
severely hamper the development of the government bond market, including the
process of making bonds more liquid across the spectrum, a process which the
RBI is engaged in.
The FSLRC also seems to be inconsistent in its emphasis on synergies and
regulatory uniformity. All regulation of trading should move under one roof, all
regulation of consumer protection should move under another roof, but the
regulation of credit should be balkanized – banks should continue to be regulated
by the RBI but the regulation of the quasi-bank NBFCs should move to the
Unified Financial Agency, a regulatory behemoth that would combine
supervision of trading as well as credit. This balkanization makes little sense and
would hamper regulatory uniformity, the supervision of credit growth, and the
conduct of monetary policy.
More broadly, the FSLRC seems to have an idealistic view of the benefits of
reorganization. It seems to believe that once activities are combined in an
organization, synergies can be fully exploited, while if they exist in separate
organizations, synergies will not be exploited. I too shared such a view, but I
now believe it is too extreme. Silos within a large bureaucratic regulator may
prevent synergies from being exploited, while frequent inter-regulatory meetings
can allow regulators to capture many of available synergies between their
activities. Indeed, one particularly useful proposal by the FSLRC is to put the
Financial Sector Development Council on a firmer footing. It is a good venue for
inter-regulatory cooperation, and its benefits are further augmented by personal
interactions. For instance, Chairman SEBI and I try to get together once every
month to note and resolve issues.
At the same time, while negotiations and cooperation between regulators can
overcome organizational barriers, it is not wise to give a regulator a
responsibility and leave the tools for exercising that responsibility in other
hands. The RBI has responsibility for managing the internal and external value
of the rupee, and more broadly, working towards macroeconomic stability. As a
number of multilateral agencies and academics have recognized, the ability to
shape capital inflows is now a recognized part of the macro-prudential tool kit.
But by taking away control over internal capital inflows from the RBI, isn’t the
FSLRC taking away an important tool from the RBI?
IF IT AIN’T BROKE…
Lest all this sound like an unthinking defence of regulatory turf, let me add that
there are places where the RBI could give up powers. For instance, if the
government wants to manage its own debt, there is no reason for the RBI to
stand in the way. I don’t believe the government suffers any less from conflicts
of interest in debt management (unlike the views of the FSLRC), but the RBI
could well carry out the government’s instructions without any loss in welfare. I
imagine, however, that the government will depend on deputations from the RBI
for a while to help it manage its debt.
Instead, think of my remarks as an attempt to distil what is useful from the
FSLRC report, while eschewing grand schemes with dubious chances of success.
Undoubtedly our laws need reform, but that is no reason to try entirely new
approaches to legislation, overlaid on entirely new regulatory structures, overlaid
on entirely new oversight over regulation. Undoubtedly, we have had, and will
have, periods when regulators have not gotten along with each other. But is that
a reason to merge some organizations and break up others, perhaps ensuring
dysfunctionality along many other dimensions. After all, there is no single
regulatory architecture that has emerged with distinction from the crisis. Instead,
different regulatory architectures have succeeded or failed based on the
circumstances of the country failed and the quality of the regulator.
Undoubtedly, we have also had occasions when regulators have exceeded
their remit or been high-handed. But is that a reason to subject their every action
to judicial second-guessing? Is there a reason we need more checks and
balances, or are we trying to solve a problem that does not exist. As the Chinese
would say, let us recognize the value of crossing the river by feeling each stone
before we put our weight on it. Let us not take a blind jump hoping that a stone
will be there to support us when we land.
G
IV
As I entered my last few days in office, I wanted to leave explaining why an independent central bank
was necessary in India. An invitation from St Stephen’s College, which has produced so many good
economists in India, was the ideal venue. There was one specific issue I wanted to clarify, the RBI
dividend. Despite paying the largest amounts the RBI had ever paid to the government as dividend
during my term as Governor, there was still constant suggestions that we could pay more. Some of
these suggestions reflected an inadequate understanding of the economics at work in a central bank’s
balance sheet. On my last day in office, 3 September 2016, I addressed both issues.
The Independence of the Central Bank
ood morning. It is great to be invited to speak at St Stephen’s College. In
1980, I toyed with the idea of joining my best friends in applying for
admission to the BA in Economics here. Because I had worked so hard for the
IIT exam, however, I succumbed to the sunk cost fallacy and studied Electrical
Engineering. I don’t regret a moment of that misspent youth but I hope you will
grant me temporary membership of your club today!
Over the last few weeks, I have outlined the RBI’s approach to inflation,
distressed debt, financial inclusion, banking sector reform, and market reform.
Today, I want to explain why all this means India needs a strong and independent
RBI to ensure macroeconomic stability. Then I will discuss what I think is
needed to ensure such independence going forward.
THE NEED FOR MACROECONOMIC STABILITY
Growth is good, but growth with stability is better, especially in a poor country
where so many people live at the margin. For the RBI, it means ensuring growth
does not exceed our potential, adopting prudential policies that reduce our risk,
and building sufficient buffers that the country is protected against shocks.
HAVING YOUR CAKE AND EATING IT TOO: INTEREST RATES AND THE EXCHANGE RATE
This mission, however, exposes the central bank to criticism. If we try and bring
down inflation, interest rates will remain higher than borrowers desire. If
inflation comes down, the currency will depreciate less than some exporters
desire. If we push the banks to clean up, banks may be less tolerant towards
habitual non-payers. Whatever we do, someone will object. The RBI then
becomes the favourite scapegoat for underperformance – if exports are not
picking up, it is because interest rates are too high and because the exchange rate
is too strong.
Unlike the complainants, the RBI does not have the luxury of economic
inconsistency. If we start buying dollars in a big way to depreciate the exchange
rate, we will be able to buy fewer government bonds if we are to maintain
control over liquidity. The consequence will be higher interest rates in the bond
market. Moreover, the depreciated exchange rate will mean higher inflation,
which in turn will mean higher policy interest rates given the inflation objective
the government has set for us. Once again, this means higher interest rates. Just
look at Brazil or Russia to understand you cannot have a significantly
depreciated exchange rate and lower interest rates at the same time if you want
stable growth!
FIRST YEAR ECONOMICS: THERE IS NO FREE LUNCH. RBI DIVIDEND POLICY
A fundamental lesson in economics is there is no free lunch. This can be seen in
the matter of the RBI dividend: Some commentators seem to suggest that public
sector banks could be recapitalized entirely if only the RBI paid a larger
dividend to the government. Let me explain why matters are not so simple. If
what follows is complicated, trust me, it is. But pay attention, students,
especially because it is about your money. I am sure you will understand.
How does the RBI generate surplus profits? We, of course, print the currency
held by the public, as well as issue deposits (that is, reserves) to commercial
banks. Those are our fixed liabilities. As we issue these liabilities, we buy
financial assets from the market. We do not pay interest on our liabilities.
However, the financial assets we hold, typically domestic and foreign
government bonds, do pay interest. So we generate a large net interest income
simply because we pay nothing on virtually all our liabilities.
Our total costs, largely for currency printing and banker commissions,
amount to only about 1/7th of our total net interest income. So we earn a large
surplus profit, more than almost the entire public sector put together, because of
the RBI’s role as the manager of the country’s currency. This belongs entirely to
the country’s citizens. Therefore, after setting aside what is needed to be retained
as equity capital to maintain the creditworthiness of the RBI, the RBI Board pays
out the remaining surplus to the RBI’s owner, the government.
The RBI Board has decided it wants the RBI to have an international AAA
rating so that RBI can undertake international transactions easily, even when the
Government is in perceived difficulty – in the midst of the Taper Tantrum, no
bank questioned our ability to deliver on the FCNR(B) swaps, even though the
liability could have been tens of thousands of crores. Based on sophisticated risk
analysis by the RBI’s staff, the Board has decided in the last three years that the
RBI’s equity position, currently around 10 lakh crores, is enough for the
purpose. It therefore has paid out the entire surplus generated to the government,
amounting to about Rs 66,000 crores each in the last two years, without holding
anything back. This is of the order of magnitude of the dividends paid by the
entire public sector to the government. In my three years at the RBI, we have
paid almost as much dividend to the government as in the entire previous
decade. Yet some suggest we should pay more, a special dividend over and
above the surplus we generate.
Even if it were legally possible to pay unrealized surplus (it is not), and even
if the Board were convinced a higher dividend would not compromise the
creditworthiness of the RBI, there is a more fundamental economic reason why a
special dividend would not help the government with its budgetary constraints.
Here’s why: Much of the surplus we make comes from the interest we get on
government assets or from the capital gains we make off other market
participants. When we pay this to the government as dividends, we are putting
back into the system the money we made from it – there is no additional money
printing or reserve creation involved. (This is not strictly true. Our earnings on
foreign exchange assets come from outside the system, so when we pay this to
the government as dividend, we are printing additional money. We do account
for this.) But when we pay a special dividend to the government, we have to
create additional permanent reserves, or more colloquially, print money. Every
year, we have in mind a growth rate of permanent reserves consistent with the
economy’s cash needs and our inflation goals. Given that budgeted growth rate,
to accommodate the special dividend we will have to withdraw an equivalent
amount of money from the public by selling government bonds in our portfolio
(or alternatively, doing fewer open market purchases than we budgeted).
Of course, the government can use the special dividend to spend, reducing its
public borrowing by that amount. But the RBI will have to sell bonds of exactly
that amount to the public in order to stick to its target for money creation. The
overall net sale of government bonds by the government and the RBI combined
to the public (that is, the effective public sector borrowing requirement) will not
change. But the entire objective of financing government spending with a special
RBI dividend is to reduce overall government bond sales to the public. That
objective is not achieved!
The bottom line is that the RBI should transfer to the government the entire
surplus, retaining just enough buffers that are consistent with good central bank
risk management practice. Indeed, this year the Board paid out an extra 8,000
crores than was promised to the government around budget time. Separately, the
government can infuse capital into the banks. The two decisions need not be
linked. There are no creative ways of extracting more money from the RBI –
there is no free lunch! Instead, the government should acknowledge its
substantial equity position in the RBI and subtract it from its outstanding debt
when it announces its net debt position. That would satisfy all concerned without
monetary damage.
If what I have said just now seems complicated, it is, but it is also the correct
economic reasoning. Similar detailed rationales lead us to turn down demands to
cut interest rates in the face of high inflation, to depreciate or appreciate the
exchange rate depending on the whim of the moment, to use foreign exchange
reserves to fund projects, to display forbearance in classifying bad loans or
waived farmer loans as NPAs, and so on…
We have been tasked with a job of maintaining macroeconomic stability, and
often that task requires us to refuse seemingly obvious and attractive proposals.
The reason why we have to do what we have to do may not be easy for every
unspecialized person, even ones with substantial economics training, to grasp
quickly. Of course, we still must explain to the best of our ability but we also
need to create a structure where the public trusts the central bank to do the right
thing. This then is why we need a trusted independent central bank.
CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE
In this environment, where the central bank has to occasionally stand firm
against the highest echelons of central and state government, recall the words of
my predecessor, Dr Subbarao, when he said ‘I do hope the Finance Minister will
one day say, “I am often frustrated by the Reserve Bank, so frustrated that I want
to go for a walk, even if I have to walk alone. But thank God, the Reserve Bank
exists.”’ I would go a little further. The Reserve Bank cannot just exist, its ability
to say ‘No!’ has to be protected. At the same time, the central bank cannot
become free of all constraints, it has to work under a framework set by the
government. This requires a number of actions.
OUTLINE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE RBI
When the responsibilities of the RBI are fuzzy, its actions can continuously be
questioned. Instead, if the constitutional authorities outline a framework for the
responsibilities of the RBI, it can take actions consistent with those
responsibilities and be held to outcomes. The inflation objectives recently set for
the RBI by the government are an example of what is needed. Critics can
lambast the RBI if it fails continuously to meet the objectives, but if they want it
to lower interest rates even when the RBI barely meets its objectives, they
should instead petition the government to change the objectives.
Similarly, the RBI Board has adopted a risk-management framework which
indicates the level of equity the RBI needs, given the risks it faces. The dividend
policy of the RBI then becomes a technical matter of how much residual surplus
is available each year after bolstering equity. Frameworks thus reduce the space
for differences.
The RBI’s role in macroeconomic stability is, however, still fuzzy. While
RBI clearly has responsibility for the safety and soundness of credit institutions
and the stability of the external account, there are some areas that are hazier. For
example, with an inflation-focused framework, the RBI’s ability to be
accommodative depends on fiscal prudence from the centre and states. How
much should the RBI warn on fiscal profligacy, including the building up of
contingent liabilities, and when should such warning be seen as interfering in the
legitimate decisions of the elected representatives of the people? This is an area
where clarity would be useful.
STRENGTHEN OVERSIGHT
The freedom the RBI has to take operational decisions such as the FCNR (B)
swap arrangement, albeit invariably in consultation with the finance ministry, is
important. However, there are always government entities that are seeking
oversight over various aspects of the RBI’s activities. Multiple layers of scrutiny,
especially by entities that do not have the technical understanding, will only
hamper decision making. Instead, the government-appointed RBI Board, which
includes ex-officio government officials as well as government appointees,
should continue to play its key oversight role. In this regard, all important RBI
decisions including budgets, licences, regulation, and supervision are now either
approved by the Board or one of its sub-committees. Vacancies in the RBI
Board, which have remained unfilled for many months now, should be filled
quickly so that the full expertise and oversight of the Board can be utilized.
It is also important that Parliament understand what the central bank is doing.
The Governor and deputy governors interact regularly with various
parliamentary committees, but we have also initiated a six-monthly interaction
with the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance, where the Governor
reports on the activities of the Bank, and the Committee offers its views and
concerns.
RANK OF RBI GOVERNOR
There is a reason why central bank governors sit at the table along with the
finance ministers in G-20 meetings. It is that the central bank Governor, unlike
other regulators or government secretaries, has command over significant policy
levers and has to occasionally disagree with the most powerful people in the
country.
It is dangerous to have a de facto powerful position with low de jure status.
Today, the RBI Governor has the salary of the Cabinet Secretary. He or she is
appointed by the Prime Minister in consultation with the Finance Minister. The
Governor’s rank in the government hierarchy is not defined but it is generally
agreed that decisions will be explained only to the Prime Minister and the
Finance Minister. There is an informal understanding in India that the Governor
has the room to make needed decisions. In the interests of macroeconomic
stability, none of this should be changed, though if these issues are ever
revisited, there may be some virtue in explicitly setting the Governor’s rank
commensurate with her position as the most important technocrat in charge of
economic policy in the country.
COMMUNICATION
I do not fool myself into thinking that reporters and TV cameras follow me
around everywhere because I am a magnetic speaker. They follow RBI
governors around because they may offer market-moving information on policy.
Fortunately, I have escaped unintentionally saying anything that moves markets.
At the same time, while different RBI governors have different approaches to
communication, no one can dispense with it. Unlike a developed country, where
the central bank chairman can offer periodic Delphic pronouncements about the
course of monetary policy, and occasionally remonstrate with Parliament or the
government about the course of fiscal policy, in our developing democracy the
RBI Governor has to continuously make the case for the actions the central bank
is taking, including the many structural reforms that are under way.
Indeed, communication is as much about educating as it is about informing.
For instance, even as I explained to entrepreneurs and retail borrowers why
interest rates were not falling faster, I had to use the price of dosas to explain to
pensioners why they were actually better off earning lower nominal but higher
real interest rates. Public understanding can help ease the way for reforms, as
well as increase support for policies. The RBI Governor therefore has to explain
again and again.
Occasionally, of course, the Governor has to warn about the dangers of
certain courses of action or certain tendencies in the economy for growth and
macroeconomic stability. Finally, the Governor is also a role model for the youth
in this country, and should therefore not duck the responsibility to urge them to
follow the highest standards of citizenship when he or she is invited to speak
directly to them.
CONCLUSION
This is the last public speech I will give in India for a while – my successor has
to take over the RBI’s communication and I want to get out of his way. It has
been an honour to work for the country and especially to talk to people like you,
its future. Thanks for listening to me.
Postscript: I am not the RBI Governor any more. But the point in my speech is worth reiterating: there
is a danger in keeping the position ill-defined, because the constant effort of the bureaucracy is to
whittle down its power. This is not a recent phenomenon, as observers like T.C.A. Srinivasa-Raghavan
have noted, but the RBI risks becoming dangerously weakened as successive governments and finance
ministers misunderstand its role. The RBI Governor, as the technocrat with responsibility for the
nation’s economic risk management, is not simply another bureaucrat or regulator, and efforts to
belittle the position by bringing it into the bureaucratic hierarchy are misguided and do not serve the
national interest. More clarity about the RBI’s role, and a clearer assertion of its independence, would
be in the nation’s interest.
D
V
Perhaps the hardest letter to write to my colleagues at the RBI was a letter informing them that I would
be leaving at the end of my term. It is probably fitting to end the pieces on my term at the RBI with
that letter, written on 18 June 2016. I wanted to reflect on how much we had accomplished together,
even while promising a flurry of activity to tie up loose ends in the few months I had left.
Message to RBI Staff
ear Colleagues,
I took office in September 2013 as the 23rd Governor of the Reserve
Bank of India. At that time, the currency was plunging daily, inflation was high,
and growth was weak. India was then deemed one of the ‘Fragile Five’. In my
opening statement as Governor, I laid out an agenda for action that I had
discussed with you. By implementing these measures, I said we would ‘build a
bridge to the future, over the stormy waves produced by global financial
markets’.
Today, I feel proud that we at the Reserve Bank have delivered on all these
proposals. A new inflation-focused framework is in place that has helped halve
inflation and allowed savers to earn positive real interest rates on deposits after a
long time. We have also been able to cut interest rates by 150 basis points after
raising them initially. This has reduced the nominal interest rate the government
has to pay even while lengthening maturities it can issue – the government has
been able to issue a forty-year bond for the first time. Finally, the currency
stabilized after our actions, and our foreign exchange reserves are at a record
high, even after we have fully provided for the outflow of foreign currency
deposits we secured in 2013. Today, we are the fastest growing large economy in
the world, having long exited the ranks of the Fragile Five.
We have done far more than was laid out in that initial statement, including
helping the government reform the process of appointing public sector bank
management through the creation of the Bank Board Bureau (based on the
recommendation of the RBI-appointed Nayak Committee), creating a whole set
of new structures to allow banks to recover payments from failing projects, and
forcing timely bank recognition of their unacknowledged bad debts and
provisioning under the Asset Quality Review (AQR). We have worked on an
enabling framework for National Payments Corporation of India to roll out the
Universal Payment Interface, which will soon revolutionize mobile-to-mobile
payments in the country. Internally, the RBI has gone through a restructuring and
streamlining, designed and driven by our own senior staff. We are strengthening
the specialization and skills of our employees so that they are second to none in
the world. In everything we have done, we have been guided by the eminent
public citizens on our Board such as Padma Vibhushan Dr Anil Kakodkar,
former Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission and Padma Bhushan and
Magsaysay award winner Ela Bhatt of the Self Employed Women’s Association.
The integrity and capability of our people, and the transparency of our actions, is
unparalleled, and I am proud to be a part of such a fine organization.
I am an academic and I have always made it clear that my ultimate home is in
the realm of ideas. The approaching end of my three-year term, and of my leave
at the University of Chicago, was therefore a good time to reflect on how much
we had accomplished. While all of what we laid out on that first day is done, two
subsequent developments are yet to be completed. Inflation is in the target zone,
but the monetary policy committee that will set policy has yet to be formed.
Moreover, the bank clean-up initiated under the Asset Quality Review, having
already brought more credibility to bank balance sheets, is still ongoing.
International developments also pose some risks in the short term.
While I was open to seeing these developments through, on due reflection,
and after consultation with the government, I want to share with you that I will
be returning to academia when my term as Governor ends on 4 September 2016.
I will, of course, always be available to serve my country when needed.
Colleagues, we have worked with the government over the last three years to
create a platform of macroeconomic and institutional stability. I am sure the
work we have done will enable us to ride out imminent sources of market
volatility like the threat of Brexit. We have made adequate preparations for the
repayment of Foreign Currency Non-Resident (B) deposits and their outflow,
managed properly, should largely be a non-event. Morale at the Bank is high
because of your accomplishments. I am sure the reforms the government is
undertaking, together with what will be done by you and other regulators, will
build on this platform and reflect in greater job growth and prosperity for our
people in the years to come. I am confident my successor will take us to new
heights with your help. I will still be working with you for the next couple of
months, but let me thank all of you in the RBI family in advance for your
dedicated work and unflinching support. It has been a fantastic journey together!
With gratitude
Yours sincerely
Raghuram G. Rajan
Section II
THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
I
I
The 2005 Jackson Hole Conference was to be the then Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan
Greenspan’s last, and the theme, therefore, was the legacy of the Greenspan Era. I was the Chief
Economist of the International Monetary Fund at that time, on leave from the University of Chicago. I
was asked to present a paper to the world’s central banking fraternity on how the financial sector had
evolved during Greenspan’s term at the helm. I started to write a paper extolling the developments in
finance, but as I analysed the data, I became worried about what was going on. I shifted tack and wrote
the paper on the risks posed by the financial system.
I remember telling my wife as I left home for the conference that this speech, so far out of line with
what I knew would be congratulatory speeches at the conference, would either be seen as singularly
prescient, or unwarranted scaremongering. The global financial crisis in 2007-08 ensured opinion
largely switched from the latter to the former. The following piece is based on that paper, and was
published in the IMF’s monthly Straight Talk in September 2005.
Risky Business: Skewed Incentives for Investment
Managers May Be Adding to Global Financial Risk
n the past thirty years, financial systems around the world have undergone
revolutionary change. People can borrow greater amounts at cheaper rates,
invest in a multitude of instruments catering to every possible profile of risk and
return, and share risks with strangers across the globe. Financial markets have
expanded and deepened, and the typical transaction involves more players and is
carried out at greater arm’s length.
At least three forces are behind these changes. Technical change has reduced
the cost of communication and computation, as well as the cost of acquiring,
processing, and storing information. For example, techniques ranging from
financial engineering to portfolio optimization, and from securitization to credit
scoring, are now widely used. Deregulation has removed artificial barriers
preventing entry of new firms, and has encouraged competition between
products, institutions, markets, and jurisdictions. And institutional change has
created new entities within the financial sector – such as private equity firms and
hedge funds – as well as new political, legal, and regulatory arrangements (for
example, the emergence over the past two decades of the entire institutional
apparatus behind the practice of inflation targeting, ranging from central bank
independence to the publication of regular inflation reports).
While these changes in the financial landscape have been termed
‘disintermediation’ because they involve moving away from traditional bankcentred ties, the term is a misnomer. Although in a number of industrialized
countries, individuals don’t deposit a significant portion of their savings directly
in banks any more, they invest indirectly in the market via mutual funds,
insurance companies, and pension funds, and in firms via venture capital funds,
hedge funds, and other forms of private equity. The managers of these financial
institutions, whom I shall call ‘investment managers’, have displaced banks and
‘reintermediated’ themselves between individuals and markets.
What about banks themselves? While banks can now sell much of the risk
associated with the ‘commodity’ transactions they originate, such as mortgages,
by packaging them and getting them off their balance sheets, they have to retain
a portion. This is typically the first loss, that is, the loss from the first few
mortgages in the package that stop paying. Moreover, they now focus far more
on transactions where they have a comparative advantage, typically transactions
where explicit contracts are hard to specify or where the consequences need to
be hedged by trading in the market. For example, banks offer back-up lines of
credit to commercial paper issuances by corporations. This means that when the
corporation is in trouble and commercial paper markets dry up, the bank will
step in and lend. Clearly, these are risky and illiquid loans. And they reflect a
larger pattern: as traditional transactions become more liquid and amenable to
being transacted in the market, banks are moving on to more illiquid
transactions. Competition forces them to flirt continuously with the limits of
illiquidity.
No doubt, the expansion in the variety of intermediaries and financial
transactions has major benefits, including reducing the transaction costs of
investing, expanding access to capital, allowing more diverse opinions to be
expressed in the marketplace, and permitting better risk sharing. But it also has
potential downsides, raising the question of whether we have unwittingly
accepted a Faustian bargain, trading greater welfare most of the time for a small
probability of a catastrophic meltdown. My view is that the world may be riskier
because of skewed incentives among investment managers, which I will now
describe, but it’s unlikely we will know for sure. Thus, the message for central
bankers and financial system regulators is simple: best to be prepared.
GETTING THE INCENTIVES RIGHT
In the past, bank managers were paid a largely fixed salary. Given that regulation
kept competition muted, there was no need for shareholders to offer managers
strong performance incentives (such incentives might even have been
detrimental as it would have tempted bank managers to reach out for risk). The
main check on bank managers making bad investment decisions was the bank’s
fragile capital structure (and possibly regulators). If bank management displayed
incompetence or knavery, depositors would get jittery and possibly run. The
threat of this extreme penalty, coupled with the limited upside from salaries that
were not buoyed by stock or options compensation, combined to make bankers
extremely conservative. This served depositors well since their capital was safe.
Shareholders, who enjoyed a steady rent because of the limited competition,
were also happy.
In the new, deregulated, competitive environment, investment managers can’t
be provided the same staid incentives as bank managers of yore. Because they
need the incentive to search for good investments, their compensation has to be
sensitive to investment returns, especially returns relative to their competitors.
Furthermore, new investors are attracted by high returns. And current investors,
if dissatisfied, do take their money elsewhere (although they often suffer from
inertia in doing so). Since compensation also varies with assets under
management, overall, investment managers face a compensation structure that
moves up very strongly with good performance, and falls, albeit more mildly,
with poor performance.
Therefore, the incentive structure for investment managers today differs from
the incentive structure for bank managers of the past in two important ways.
First, there is typically less downside and more upside from generating
investment returns, implying that these managers have the incentive to take more
risk. Second, their performance relative to other peer managers matters, either
because it’s directly embedded in their compensation, or because investors exit
or enter funds on that basis. The knowledge that managers are being evaluated
against others can induce superior performance, but also perverse behaviour of
various kinds.
PERVERSE BEHAVIOURS
Performance-based pay can induce risky behaviour among investment managers.
One type is to take risk that is concealed from investors. Since risk and return are
related, the manager then looks as if he outperforms peers given the risk he
takes. Typically, the kinds of risks that can most easily be concealed, given the
requirement of periodic reporting, are ‘tail’ risks – that is, risks that have a small
probability of generating severe adverse consequences and offer generous
compensation the rest of the time. A second type is to herd with other investment
managers on investment choices, because herding provides insurance the
manager will not underperform his peers. However, herd behaviour can move
asset prices away from fundamentals.
Both behaviours can reinforce each other during an asset price boom, when
investment managers are willing to bear the low probability ‘tail’ risk that asset
prices will revert to fundamentals abruptly, and the knowledge that many of their
peers are herding on this risk gives them comfort that they will not underperform
significantly if boom turns to bust. These behaviours can be compounded in an
environment of low interest rates, where the incentives of some participants to
‘search for yield’ not only increase, but where asset prices also spiral upwards,
creating the conditions for a sharp and messy realignment.
Do banks add to this behaviour or restrain it? The compensation of bank
managers, while not so tightly tied to returns, has not been left completely
untouched by competitive pressures. Banks make returns both by originating
risks and by bearing them. As traditional risks such as mortgages or loans can be
moved off bank balance sheets into the balance sheets of investment managers,
banks have an incentive to originate more of them. Thus they will tend to feed
rather than restrain the appetite for risk. As I argued earlier, however, banks
cannot sell all risk. In fact, they often have to bear the most complicated and
volatile portion of the risks they originate, so even though some risk has been
moved off their balance sheets, balance sheets are being reloaded with fresh,
more complicated risks. The data support this assessment – despite a deepening
of financial markets, banks may not be any safer than in the past. Moreover,
even though the risks banks now bear are seemingly smaller, such risks are only
the tip of an iceberg.
But perhaps the most important concern is whether banks will be able to
provide liquidity to financial markets so that if the ‘tail’ risk does materialize,
financial positions can be unwound and losses allocated so as to minimize the
consequences to the real economy. Past episodes indicate that banks have played
this role successfully. However, there is no assurance they will continue to be
able to do so. Banks have in the past been able to provide liquidity in part
because their sound balance sheets allowed them to attract available spare
liquidity in the market. However, banks today require more liquid markets to
hedge some of the risks associated with the complicated products they have
created or guarantees they have offered. Their greater reliance on market
liquidity can make their balance sheets more suspect in times of crisis, making
them less able to provide the liquidity assurance that they have provided in the
past.
Taken together, these trends suggest that even though there are far more
participants who are able to absorb risk today, the financial risks that are being
created by the system are indeed greater. And even though there should
theoretically be a diversity of opinion and actions by market participants, and a
greater capacity to absorb risk, competition and compensation may induce more
correlation in behaviour than is desirable. While it is hard to be categorical about
anything as complex as the modern financial system, it’s possible that these
developments are creating more financial-sector-induced procyclicality than in
the past. They may also create a greater (albeit still small) probability of a
catastrophic meltdown.
Unfortunately, we won’t know whether these are, in fact, serious worries
until the system has been tested. The best hope is that the system faces shocks of
increasing size, figures out what is lacking each time, and becomes more
resilient. To paraphrase St Augustine, we should therefore pray: ‘Lord, if there
be shocks, let them first be small ones.’ The danger is that the economy will be
hit unexpectedly by a perfect storm before it has been stress-tested.
If indeed risk taking is excessive, why don’t investors offer their managers
compensation contracts that restrain the short-term emphasis on returns and
associated risk taking? The answer is that there may be too little private
incentive to do so. For one, there is very little systematic evidence that past
performance in financial investment is an indicator of future performance,
Warren Buffet or Peter Lynch notwithstanding. This implies that the constant
movement by investors between funds has little social value. But investors in an
individual fund benefit when new investments pour in because the fund’s
average costs go down. As a result, the private gains from attracting investors
through a fund’s superior short-term performance exceed the social value, and
investors have too little incentive to restrain managers from focusing on the short
term.
Of course, if in addition investors don’t have complete control over managers
– because of weaknesses in corporate governance, for example – and managers
have private incentives to generate returns in the short term (to preserve their
jobs or for the public adulation that success brings), the private equilibrium may
again generate excessive risk taking. It’s also hard for a private actor to fully
capture the benefits of providing liquidity – if prices are higher and more closely
reflect fundamentals, all those who trade will benefit, not just the actor who
injected liquidity into the market. Therefore, the private sector has too little
incentive to provision for it also.
LIMITING THE FALLOUT
So what can policy makers do? While too much regulation can stifle the
competition that drives financial sector innovation, not doing anything at all
doesn’t seem like a good option either. While we still know little about the
complex workings of financial markets, two main tools come to mind.
Monetary policy. Monetary policy must be informed by its effects on
incentives. As already pointed out, both a low level as well as an unanticipated
sharp fall in interest rates can have perverse effects on incentives. This implies
that rapid, large, changes in monetary policy have significant costs, not just in
the domestic economy but in all interconnected markets. One implication is that
policy changes ought to happen at a measured (though not necessarily
predictable) pace rather than abruptly. Second, while deflation can be immensely
harmful for the real economy, an unanticipated but persistent low interest rate
can be a source of significant distortions for the financial sector, and thence for
asset prices. Not only does this mean staying further away from deflation so that
extremely low policy rates don’t have to be used as a tool, it also implies
exercising greater supervisory vigilance when those rates are in place to contain
asset price bubbles. Third, and somewhat obviously, one can no longer just
examine the state of the banking system and its exposure to credit to reach
conclusions about aggregate credit creation, let alone the stability of the financial
system. Finally, the financial sector may experience greater liquidity and
solvency problems in some situations, so central banks have to be vigilant for
any possible shortfalls in aggregate liquidity.
PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION
The prudential net may have to be cast wider than simply around commercial or
investment banks to include institutions such as hedge funds. What instruments
might be used? Certainly, greater transparency and disclosure, along with capital
regulation, have a role to play. But policymakers might also need to consider
using the managerial compensation system to align the behaviour of investment
managers with the public interest. Rather than limiting or constraining
compensation, compensation regulation might simply require long-term
investment of a portion of top investment managers’ compensation in the claims
issued by the investment that is being managed. Given that some investors
already require this of their investment managers, such a requirement may not be
excessively intrusive. Of course, one has to be careful about making investment
managers overly conservative, and thus losing the benefits their risk-taking
behaviour brings to the economy. This is why the optimal probability of a
financial sector meltdown will never be zero.
Postscript: As the Wall Street Journal reported on 2 January 2009 in an article by Justin Lahart on my
Jackson Hole presentation:
‘Incentives were horribly skewed in the financial sector with workers reaping rich rewards for
making money but being only lightly penalized for losses, Mr Rajan argued. That encouraged financial
firms to invest in complex products, with potentially big payoffs, which could on occasion fail
spectacularly.
He pointed to “credit default swaps” which act as insurance against bond defaults. He said insurers
and others were generating big returns selling these swaps with the appearance of taking on little risk,
even though the pain could be immense if defaults actually occurred.
Mr Rajan also argued that because banks were holding a portion of the credit securities they
created on their books, if those securities ran into trouble, the banking system itself would be at risk.
Banks would lose confidence in one another, he said. “The interbank market could freeze up, and one
could well have a full-blown financial crisis.”
Two years later, that’s essentially what happened.’
D
II
I returned to academia in January 2007 after a three and a half year stint at the IMF. What follows are a
sampling of the pieces, including public speeches. The following elaborates on the risk-taking
incentives in the system, and was delivered in February 2007, just before the crisis.
Financial Conditions, Asset Management, and
Political Risks: Trying to Make Sense of Our Times
espite widespread strong productivity growth, nominal investment,
especially corporate investment, has remained relatively weak for the world
as a whole, while desired savings is strong. Call this a ‘savings glut’ as did
Chairman Bernanke or ‘investment restraint’ as did the IMF, the net effect is an
imbalance between desired savings and realized investment. Consequently, real
long-term interest rates have been low for some time. Interestingly, even as the
Federal Reserve raised policy rates during 2006, long-term interest rates fell
further – in slowing domestic demand in the United States, markets may believe
the Fed is aggravating the worldwide excess of desired savings over realized
investment further.
Current conditions are unlikely to be permanent. Given aging populations in
developed countries though, one would presume that the rebalancing of
worldwide investment to desired savings will have to take place primarily in
non-industrial countries. Investment will increase partly through foreign direct
investment, but partly mediated by the financial systems in emerging markets,
which will have to develop further. Increases in consumption as safety nets
improve and retail finance becomes widely available will also help reduce
desired savings. Certainly, the seemingly perverse pattern of net capital flows,
from poor to rich countries, will have to change, if for no other reason than to
accommodate demographics.
I now want to turn to the increasing institutionalization of, and competition
within, advanced financial markets. The link between the issues will soon be
clear. The break-up of oligopolistic banking systems and the rise of financial
markets has expanded individual financial investment choices tremendously.
While individuals don’t deposit a significant portion of their savings directly in
banks any more, they don’t invest directly in the market either. They invest
indirectly via mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds, venture capital
funds, hedge funds, and other forms of private equity. The managers of these
financial institutions, whom I shall call ‘investment managers,’ have largely
displaced banks and ‘reintermediated’ themselves between individuals and
markets.
As competition between these various institutional forms for the public’s
investment dollar increases, each one attempts to assure the public that they will
offer superior performance. But what does superior performance mean?
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
The typical manager of financial assets generates returns based on the systematic
risk he takes – the so-called beta risk – and the value his abilities contribute to
the investment process – his so-called alpha. Shareholders in any asset
management firm are unlikely to pay the manager much for returns from beta
risk – for example, if the shareholder wants exposure to large traded U.S. stocks,
she can get the returns associated with that risk simply by investing in the
Vanguard S&P 500 index fund, for which she pays a fraction of a per cent in
fees. What the shareholder will really pay for is if the manager beats the S&P
500 index regularly, that is, generates excess returns while not taking more risk.
Indeed, hedge fund managers often claim to produce returns that are
uncorrelated with the traditional market (the so-called market neutral strategies)
so that all the returns they generate are excess returns or alpha, which deserve to
be well compensated.
In reality, there are only a few sources of alpha for investment managers. One
comes from having truly special abilities in identifying undervalued financial
assets – Warren Buffet, the U.S. billionaire investor, certainly has these, but
study after academic study shows that very few investment managers do, and
certainly not in a way that can be predicted before the fact by ordinary investors.
A second source of alpha is from what one might call activism. This means
using financial resources to create, or obtain control over, real assets and to use
that control to change the payout obtained on the financial investment. A venture
capitalist who transforms an inventor, a garage, and an idea into a full-fledged
profitable and professionally managed corporation is creating alpha. A private
equity fund that undertakes a hostile corporate takeover, cuts inefficiency, and
improves profits is also creating alpha. So is a vulture investor who buys up
defaulted emerging market debt and presses authorities through various legal
devices to press the country to pay more.
A third source of alpha is financial entrepreneurship or engineering –
investing in exotic financial securities that are not easily available to the ordinary
investor, or creating securities or cash flow streams that appeal to particular
investors or tastes. Of course, if enough of these securities or streams are
created, they cease to have scarcity or diversification value, and are valued like
everything else. Thus this source of alpha depends on the manager constantly
innovating and staying ahead of the competition.
Finally, alpha can also stem from liquidity provision. For instance,
investment managers, having relatively easy access to finance, can hold illiquid
or arbitrage positions to maturity: if a closed end fund is trading at a significant
premium to the underlying market, the manager can short the fund, buy the
underlying market, and hold the position till the premium eventually dissipates.
What is important here is that the investment managers have the liquidity to hold
till the arbitrage closes.
ILLIQUIDITY SEEKING
This discussion should suggest that alpha is quite hard to generate since most
ways of doing so depend on the investment manager possessing unique abilities
– to pick stock, identify weaknesses in management and remedy them, or
undertake financial innovation. Unique ability is rare. How then do the masses of
investment managers justify the faith reposed in them by masses of ordinary
investors? The answer is probably liquidity provision, which is the activity that
depends least on special managerial ability and could be termed the poor
manager’s source of alpha.
The problem when the world has excess desired savings relative to
investment, and when central banks are accommodative, is that it is awash in
liquidity. Many investment managers can enter the business of liquidity
provision, and even as they take ever more illiquid positions, they compete away
the returns from doing so. The point is that current benign conditions engender
‘illiquidity-seeking’ behaviour. But they could have worse effects.
TAIL RISK AND HERDING
For what is the manager with relatively limited ability to do when central banks
flood the market with liquidity and the rents from liquidity provision are
competed away? He could hide risk – that is, pass off returns generated through
taking on beta risk as alpha by hiding the extent of beta risk. Since additional
risks will generally imply higher returns, managers may take risks that are
typically not in their comparison benchmark (and hidden from investors) so as to
generate the higher returns to distinguish themselves.
For example, a number of hedge funds, insurance companies, and pension
funds have entered the credit-derivative market to sell guarantees against a
company defaulting. Essentially, these investment managers collect premia in
ordinary times from people buying the guarantees. With very small probability,
however, the company will default, forcing the guarantor to pay out a large
amount. The investment managers are thus selling disaster insurance or,
equivalently, taking on ‘peso’ or ‘tail’ risks, which produce a positive return most
of the time as compensation for a rare very negative return. These strategies have
the appearance of producing very high alphas (high returns for low risk), so
managers have an incentive to load up on them, especially when times are good
and disaster looks remote. Every once in a while, however, they will blow up.
Since true performance can only be estimated over a long period, far exceeding
the horizon set by the average manager’s incentives, managers will take these
risks if they can.
One example of this behaviour was observed in 1994, when a number of
money market mutual funds in the United States came close to ‘breaking the
buck’ (going below a net asset value of $1 per share, which is virtually
unthinkable for an ostensibly riskless fund). Some money market funds had to be
bailed out by their parent companies. The reason they came so close to disaster
was because they had been employing risky derivatives strategies in order to
goose up returns, and these strategies came unstuck in the tail event caused by
the Federal Reserve’s abrupt rate hike.
While some managers may load up on hidden ‘tail’ risk to look as if they are
generating alpha, others know that for the more observable investments or
strategies for their portfolio, there is safety in mimicking the investment
strategies of competitors – after all, who can be fired when everybody
underperforms? In other words, even if they suspect financial assets are
overvalued, they know their likely underperformance will be excused if they
herd with everyone else.
Such herd behaviour – a desire to not underperform the observable strategies
of peers – may have motivated a number of European insurers, who moved into
equities in the late 1990s just before the crash. It could be motivating the move
by pension funds and insurance companies today into investing in commodities
or hedge funds.
Both the phenomenon of taking on ‘tail’ risk and that of herding can
reinforce each other during an asset-price boom, when investment managers are
willing to bear the low probability ‘tail’ risk that asset prices will revert to
fundamentals abruptly, and the knowledge that many of their peers are herding
on this risk gives them comfort that they will not underperform significantly if
boom turns to bust.
RISK SEEKING
Times of plentiful liquidity not only induce investment managers to seek
illiquidity, ‘tail’ risk, as well as herd, since they are also times of low interest
rates, they may induce more familiar risk-seeking behaviour. For example, when
an insurance company has promised premium holders returns of 6 per cent,
while the typical matching long-term bond rate is 4 per cent, it has no option if it
thinks low interest rates are likely to persist, or if it worries about quarterly
earnings, but to take on risk, either directly or through investments in alternative
assets like hedge funds. Similarly, a pension fund that has well-defined longdated obligations will have a greater incentive to boost returns through extra risk
when risk-free returns are low. All manner of risk premia are driven down by
this search for yield and thus risk.
So let me summarize. We are experiencing a widespread phenomenon of
high productivity growth, but low investment relative to desired savings, which
has pushed down interest rates and pushed up asset prices. With plentiful
liquidity, investment managers have reduced the premia for risk as they search
for yield. In an attempt to generate alpha, many managers may be taking on beta
risk, and even underpricing it. Of course, low interest rates and plentiful access
to credit will, for a time, result in low default rates, which will appear to justify
the low risk premia. The search for yield and for illiquidity knows no borders as
oceans of capital spread across the globe, and asset prices across the globe are
being pumped up. As the French say, ‘Pourvu que ça dure!’
CONSEQUENCES
What could go wrong? The hope is of a ‘soft’ landing in the real sector where the
factors that led to the current real sector imbalances reverse gently – for instance,
domestic demand picks up in the non-industrial world, and growth recovers in
Europe and Japan, even while tighter financial conditions slow consumption in
the United States. As a better balance between desired savings and investment is
achieved, interest rates move up slowly, credit becomes less easy (aided by
central bank tightening), and illiquidity seeking and risk seeking reverse gently
without major blow-ups.
Of course, if any of this happens more abruptly, the consequences could be
uglier. The problems would be most acute if the banking sector is infected.
Banks make returns both by originating risks and by bearing them. Since risks
that do not need management or are relatively easy to assess can be moved off
bank balance sheets into the balance sheets of investment managers, banks have
an incentive to originate more of them. Thus they will tend to feed rather than
restrain the appetite for risk. Banks cannot, however, sell all risks. They often
have to bear the most complicated, hard-to-manage, and volatile portion of the
risks they originate. So even though some risk has been moved off bank balance
sheets, balance sheets have been reloaded with fresh, more complicated, risks. In
fact, the data suggest that despite a deepening of financial markets, banks may
not be any safer than in the past. Moreover, the risk they now bear is a small
(though perhaps the most volatile) tip of an iceberg of risk they have created.
Perhaps a more important concern is whether banks will be able to provide
liquidity to financial markets so that if ‘tail’ risks do materialize, financial
positions can be unwound and losses allocated so that the consequences to the
real economy are minimized. Past episodes indicate that banks have played this
role successfully. However, there is no assurance they will continue to be able to
play the role. In particular, banks have been able to provide liquidity in the past,
in part because their sound balance sheets have allowed them to attract the
available spare liquidity in the market. But banks today also require liquid
markets to hedge some of the risks associated with the complicated products
they have created, or guarantees they have offered. Their greater reliance on
market liquidity can make their balance sheets more suspect in times of crisis,
making them less able to provide the liquidity assurance that they have provided
in the past.
Even if the banking system is safe, supervisors and regulators have to be
concerned about the rest of the financial system – in the United States, 80 per
cent of value is added by the financial sector that is outside the banking system.
The non-bank sector is increasingly central to economic activity and is not just a
passive holder of assets. Moreover, some non-banks such as insurance
companies and some hedge funds are subject to runs. But most important, risks
to financial stability are invariably compounded by political risk.
Let me explain this last concern. First, the general public’s money is being
invested in some of the more risky ventures, a fact highlighted by the revelation
that a number of state pension funds in the United States were invested in a risky
hedge fund like Amaranth. Diversification into such alternative investments can
be a valuable component of an overall investment strategy if it is carefully
thought out. The problem is that all too often, it takes place as a form of herding
and late in the game – after lagging pension managers see the wonderful returns
in energy or from writing credit derivatives made by their more competent or
lucky competitors, there is pressure on them to enter the field. They do so late,
when the good hedge or commodity funds are closed to investment, and when
the cycle is nearer peak than trough. Myriad new unseasoned hedge or
commodity funds are started precisely to exploit the distorted incentives of the
pension or insurance fund managers who queue like lemmings to dutifully place
the public’s money. Thus far losses from isolated failures have been washed
away in diversified portfolios and the public has not noticed. Will this always
continue?
In Europe, we have already had a taste of the potential fallout as pensioners,
who were inappropriately advised to invest in Argentinian Bonds or Parmalat,
just before these entities defaulted, pressed for compensation. The defaults were
isolated, so the fallout was manageable. Could a more generalized downturn lead
to more widespread revulsion against financial markets? What of emerging
markets where the investors who have been drawn into the financial markets
over the last few years have never experienced a downturn?
Second, the fees charged by investment managers like hedge funds and
private equity cannot but arouse envy. It is surprising that despite the furor over
CEO pay, very little angst has been expressed over investment manager pay,
even though Steve Kaplan and Joshua Rauh of the University of Chicago suggest
in a 2006 working paper titled ‘Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to
the Rise in the Highest Incomes?’ that investment manager pay growth has
probably exceeded CEO pay growth. My sense is that there is a belief amongst
the public that many investment managers are following sophisticated
investment strategies – in other words, that the managers are generating alphas
and earning returns for their talents – hence their pay is not questioned.
Yet investigations of collapsed funds such as LTCM don’t seem to indicate
terribly sophisticated strategies – indeed more beta than alpha. While there is a
selection bias in examining failed funds – they are likely to have more beta – it is
also likely that large funds with unsophisticated strategies got to that size
through a series of lucky bets that paid off. So their managers will have taken
home enormous sums of money before it is realized that they had simply been
gambling with other people’s money. Large losses, ‘greedy’ managers, and an
angry public – this is a perfect scenario for a muck-raking politician to build a
career on. The regulatory impediments that could be imposed on the investment
managers who add value, and on the financial sector as a whole, could be
debilitating.
Third, and accentuating the political problem, is that while it is clear to the
public how a bank making a loan benefits the real economy or ‘Main Street’, it is
less clear to it how an investment manager who spreads and allocates risk,
improves governance, or reveals information through his trading, helps. We
economists know these are very important functions in the economy but they are
not so easily sold politically.
And finally, since capital has spread across borders, any sudden future
retrenchment could not only inflict pain on recipient countries but also generate
foreign political pressure seeking to impede the free flow of capital.
Let me conclude. The last few years have been, in many ways, the best of
times for the world economy. The financial sector has contributed immensely.
However, the current conjuncture has led to some practices that deserve
examination. In particular, I worry whether compensation structures give too
much incentive to take risk and, relatedly, whether pay is sufficiently linked to
performance. While claims are made that the financial sector is becoming more
and more efficient, and that it is adding more and more value, the amount of true
value added by the sector is hard to observe. With high pay, questionable
practices, and hard-to-observe value addition, the financial sector is politically
vulnerable. In a downturn, even if there are no systemic risks in the financial
system – for instance, if all the losses are run by stable passive holders of assets
such as pension funds – the political system may react in a way that has systemic
consequences. To avoid the risk of possibly excessive political reaction, it is
important that the issues that I have just alluded to be discussed by the financial
sector itself, and where necessary, and possible, adjustments made. It would be a
shame if sparks from the red-hot financial sector set off a conflagration that
destroyed the very real gains finance has made in the last few decades. Indeed,
history suggests abundant caution.
T
III
In 2009, as regulators started figuring out what needed to be done to make sure the financial system
was made more secure after the financial crisis, I delivered the Homer Jones Lecture organized by the
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis in St Louis on 15 April. This is what I said. (I thank Luigi Zingales
for very useful discussion including some of the ideas in this talk.)
The Credit Crisis and Cycle-proof Regulation
here is some consensus that the proximate causes of the crisis are: (i) the
U.S. financial sector misallocated resources to real estate, financed through
the issuance of exotic new financial instruments; (ii) a significant portion of
these instruments found their way, directly or indirectly, into commercial and
investment bank balance sheets; (iii) these investments were largely financed
with short-term debt; (iv) the mix was potent, and imploded starting in 2007. On
these, there is broad agreement. But let us dig a little deeper.
This is a crisis born in some ways from previous financial crises. A wave of
crises swept through the emerging markets in the late 1990s: East Asian
economies collapsed, Russia defaulted, and Argentina, Brazil, and Turkey faced
severe stress. In response to these problems, emerging markets became far more
circumspect about borrowing from abroad to finance domestic demand. Instead,
their corporations, governments, and households cut back on investment and
reduced consumption.
From net absorbers of financial capital from the rest of the world, a number
of these countries became net exporters of financial capital. When combined
with the savings of habitual exporters like Germany and Japan, there was what
Chairman Bernanke referred to as a global savings glut.
Clearly, the net financial savings generated in one part of the world have to
be absorbed by deficits elsewhere. Industrial country corporations initially
absorbed these savings by expanding investment, especially in information
technology. But this proved unsustainable, and investment was cut back sharply
following the collapse of the Information Technology bubble.
Extremely accommodative monetary policy by the world’s central banks, led
by the Federal Reserve, ensured the world did not suffer a deep recession.
Instead, the low interest rates in a number of countries ignited demand in
interest-sensitive sectors such as automobiles and housing. House prices started
rising as did housing investment.
The United States was not by any means the highest in terms of price growth.
Housing prices reached higher values relative to rent or incomes in Ireland,
Spain, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand, for example.
Then, why did the crisis first manifest itself in the United States? Probably
because the U.S. went further on financial innovation, thus drawing more
marginal-credit-quality buyers into the market!
A home mortgage loan is very hard for an international investor to hold
directly because it requires servicing, is of uncertain credit quality, and has a
high propensity to default. Securitization dealt with some of these concerns. If
the mortgage was packaged together with mortgages from other areas,
diversification would reduce the risk. Furthermore, the riskiest claims against the
package could be sold to those who had the capacity to evaluate them and had an
appetite for bearing the risk, while the safest AAA-rated portions could be held
by international investors.
Indeed, because of the demand from international investors for AAA paper,
securitization became focused on squeezing out the most AAA paper from an
underlying package of mortgages; the lower quality securities issued against the
initial package of mortgages were packaged together once again with similar
securities from other packages, and a new range of securities, including a large
quantity rated AAA, issued by this ‘Collateralized Debt Obligation’.
The ‘originate-to-securitize’ process had the unintended consequence of
reducing the due diligence undertaken by originators. Of course, originators
could not completely ignore the true quality of borrowers since they were held
responsible for initial defaults, but because house prices were rising steadily over
this period, even this source of discipline weakened. If the buyer could not make
even the nominal payments involved on the initial low mortgage teaser rates, the
lender could repossess the house, sell it quickly in the hot market, and recoup
any losses through the price appreciation. In the liquid housing market, so long
as the buyer could scrawl X on the dotted line, she could own.
The slicing and dicing through repeated securitization of the original package
of mortgages created very complicated securities. The problems in valuing these
securities were not obvious when house prices were rising and defaults were few.
But as the house prices stopped rising and defaults started increasing, the
valuation of these securities became very complicated.
It was not entirely surprising that bad investments would be made in the
housing boom. What was surprising was that the originators of these complex
securities, the financial institutions, who should have understood the
deterioration of the underlying quality of mortgages, held on to so many of the
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in their own portfolios. Why did the sausagemakers, who knew what was in the sausage, keep so many sausages for personal
consumption?
The explanation has to be that at least one arm of the bank thought these
securities were worthwhile investments, despite their risk. Investment in MBS
seemed to be part of a culture of excessive risk-taking that had overtaken banks.
A key factor contributing to this culture is that, over short periods of time, it is
very hard, especially in the case of new products, to tell whether a financial
manager is generating true excess returns adjusting for risk, or whether the
current returns are simply compensation for a risk that has not yet shown itself
but that will eventually materialize. This could engender excess risk taking both
at the top and within the firm.
For instance, the performance of CEOs is evaluated based in part on the
earnings they generate relative to their peers. To the extent that some leading
banks can generate legitimately high returns, this puts pressure on other banks to
keep up. Follower-bank bosses may end up taking excessive risks in order to
boost various observable measures of performance.
Indeed, even if managers recognize that this type of strategy is not truly
value-creating, a desire to pump up their stock prices and their personal
reputations may nevertheless make it the most attractive option for them. There
is anecdotal evidence of such pressure on top management – perhaps most
famously, Citigroup Chairman Chuck Prince, describing why his bank continued
financing buyouts despite mounting risks, said: ‘When the music stops, in terms
of liquidity, things will be complicated. But, as long as the music is playing,
you’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing.’ Financial Times, 9 July
2007.
Even if top management wants to maximize long-term bank value, it may
find it difficult to create incentives and control systems that steer subordinates in
this direction. Given the competition for talent, traders have to be paid
generously based on performance. But, many of the compensation schemes paid
for short-term risk-adjusted performance. This gave traders an incentive to take
risks that were not recognized by the system, so they could generate income that
appeared to stem from their superior abilities, even though it was in fact only a
market-risk premium.
The classic case of such behaviour is to write insurance on infrequent events
such as defaults, taking on what is termed ‘tail’ risk. If a trader is allowed to
boost her bonus by treating the entire insurance premium as income, instead of
setting aside a significant fraction as a reserve for an eventual payout, she will
have an excessive incentive to engage in this sort of trade.
Indeed, traders who bought AAA MBS were essentially getting the additional
spread on these instruments relative to corporate AAA securities (the spread
being the insurance premium) while ignoring the additional default risk entailed
in these untested securities.
The traders in AIG’s Financial Products Division just took all this to an
extreme by writing credit default swaps, pocketing the premiums as bonus, and
not bothering to set aside reserves in case the bonds that were covered by the
swaps actually defaulted.
This is not to say that risk managers in a financial institution are unaware of
such incentives. However, they may be unable to fully control them, because
‘tail’ risks are by their nature rare, and therefore hard to quantify with precision
before they occur. While they could try and impose crude limits on the activities
of the traders taking maximum risk, these traders are likely to have been very
profitable (before the risk actually is realized), and such actions are unlikely to
sit well with a top management that is being pressured for profits.
Finally, all these shaky assets were financed with short-term debt. This is
because in good times, short-term debt seems relatively cheap compared to longterm capital, and the market is willing to supply it because the costs of illiquidity
appear remote. Markets seem to favour a bank capital structure that is heavy on
short-term leverage. In bad times, though, the costs of illiquidity seem to be
more salient, while risk-averse (and burnt) bankers are unlikely to take on
excessive risk. The markets then encourage a capital structure that is heavy on
capital.
Given the proximate causes of high bank holdings of mortgage-backed
securities, as well as other risky loans, such as those to private equity, financed
with a capital structure heavy on short-term debt, the crisis had a certain degree
of inevitability. As house prices stopped rising, and indeed started falling,
mortgage defaults started increasing. Mortgage-backed securities fell in value,
became more difficult to price, and their prices became more volatile. They
became hard to borrow against, even short term. Banks became illiquid, and
eventually insolvent. Only heavy intervention has kept the financial system
afloat, and though the market seems to believe that the worst is over, its relief
may be premature.
Who is to blame for the financial crisis? As the above discussion suggests,
there are many possible suspects – the exporting countries who still do not
understand that their thrift is a burden and not a blessing to the rest of the world,
the U.S. household that has spent way beyond its means in recent years, the
monetary and fiscal authorities who were excessively ready to intervene to
prevent short-term pain, even though they only postponed problems into the
future, the bankers who took the upside and left the downside to the taxpayer, the
politician who tried to expand his vote bank by extending home-ownership to
even those who could not afford it, the markets that tolerated high leverage in the
boom only to become risk averse in the bust…
There are plenty of suspects, and enough blame to spread. But if all are to
blame, though, should we also not admit they all had a willing accomplice – the
euphoria generated by the boom. After all, who is there to stand for stability and
against the prosperity and growth in a boom?
Internal risk managers, having repeatedly pointed to risks that never
materialized during an upswing, have little credibility and influence – that is if
they still have jobs. It is also very hard for contrarian investors to bet against the
boom – as Keynes said, the market can stay irrational longer than investors can
stay solvent. Politicians have an incentive to ride the boom, indeed to abet it
through the deregulation sought by bankers. After all, bankers not only have the
money to influence legislation but also have the moral authority conferred by
prosperity.
And what of regulators? When everyone is for the boom, how can regulators
stand against it? They are reduced to rationalizing why it would be technically
impossible for them to stop it. Everyone is therefore complicit in the crisis
because, ultimately, they are aided and abetted by cyclical euphoria. And unless
we recognize this, the next crisis will be hard to prevent.
For we typically regulate in the midst of a bust when righteous politicians
feel the need to do something, when bankers’ frail balance sheets and vivid
memories makes them eschew any risk, and when regulators have backbones
stiffened by public disapproval of past laxity.
But we reform under the delusion that the regulated, and the markets they
operate in, are static and passive, and that the regulatory environment will not
vary with the cycle. Ironically, faith in draconian regulation is strongest at the
bottom of the cycle, when there is little need for participants to be regulated. By
contrast, the misconception that markets will take care of themselves is most
widespread at the top of the cycle, at the point of maximum danger to the
system. We need to acknowledge these differences and enact cycle-proof
regulation, for a regulation set against the cycle will not stand.
Consider the dangers of ignoring this point. Recent reports have argued for
‘countercyclical’ capital requirements – raising bank capital requirements
significantly in good times, while allowing them to fall somewhat in bad times.
While sensible prima facie, these proposals may be far less effective than
intended.
To see why, recognize that in boom times, the market demands very low
levels of capital from financial intermediaries, in part because euphoria makes
losses seem remote. So when regulated financial intermediaries are forced to
hold more costly capital than the market requires, they have an incentive to shift
activity to unregulated intermediaries, as did banks in setting up SIVs and
conduits during the current crisis. Even if regulators are strengthened to detect
and prevent this shift in activity, banks can subvert capital requirements by
taking on risk the regulators do not see, or do not penalize adequately with
capital requirements.
Attempts to reduce capital requirements in busts are equally fraught. The
risk-averse market wants banks to hold a lot more capital than regulators require,
and its will naturally prevails.
Even the requirements themselves may not be immune to the cycle. Once
memories of the current crisis fade, and once the ideological cycle turns, there
will be enormous political pressure to soften capital requirements or their
enforcement.
To have a better chance of creating stability through the cycle – of being
cycle-proof – new regulations should be comprehensive, contingent, and costeffective. Regulations that apply comprehensively to all levered financial
institutions are less likely to encourage the drift of activities from heavily
regulated to lightly regulated institutions over the boom, a source of instability
since the damaging consequences of such drift come back to hit the heavily
regulated institutions in the bust, through channels that no one foresees.
Regulations should also be contingent so they have maximum force when the
private sector is most likely to do itself harm but bind less the rest of the time.
This will make regulations more cost-effective, which will make them less prone
to arbitrage or dilution.
Consider some examples of such regulations. First, instead of asking
institutions to raise permanent capital, ask them to arrange for capital to be
infused when the institution or the system is in trouble. Because these
‘contingent capital‘ arrangements will be contracted in good times when the
chances of a downturn seem remote, they will be relatively cheap (compared to
raising new capital in the midst of a recession) and thus easier to enforce. Also,
because the infusion is seen as an unlikely possibility, firms cannot go out and
increase their risks, using the future capital as backing. Finally, because the
infusions come in bad times when capital is really needed, they protect the
system and the taxpayer in the right contingencies.
One version of contingent capital is for banks to issue debt which would
automatically convert to equity when two conditions are met; first, the system is
in crisis, either based on an assessment by regulators or based on objective
indicators, and second, the bank’s capital ratio falls below a certain value. The
first condition ensures that banks that do badly because of their own
idiosyncratic errors, and not when the system is in trouble, don’t get to avoid the
disciplinary effects of debt. The second condition rewards well-capitalized banks
by allowing them to avoid the forced conversion (the number of shares the debt
converts to will be set at a level so as dilute the value of old equity
substantially), while also giving banks that anticipate losses an incentive to raise
new equity well in time.
Another version of contingent capital is to require that systemically important
levered financial institutions buy fully collateralized insurance policies (from
unlevered institutions, foreigners, or the government) that will infuse capital into
these institutions when the system is in trouble.
Here is one way it could operate. Megabank would issue capital insurance
bonds, say to sovereign wealth funds. It would invest the proceeds in Treasury
bonds, which would then be placed in a custodial account in State Street Bank.
Every quarter, Megabank would pay a pre-agreed insurance premium (contracted
at the time the capital insurance bond is issued) which, together with the interest
accumulated on the Treasury bonds held in the custodial account, would be paid
to the sovereign fund.
If the aggregate losses of the banking system exceed a certain pre-specified
amount, Megabank would start getting a payout from the custodial account to
bolster its capital. The sovereign wealth fund will now face losses on the
principal it has invested, but on average, it will have been compensated by the
insurance premium.
Consider next regulations aimed at ‘too-big-to-fail’ institutions. Regulations
to limit their size and activities will become very onerous when growth is high,
thus increasing the incentive to dilute them. Perhaps, instead, a more cyclically
sustainable regulation would be to make these institutions easier to close. What
if systemically important financial institutions were required to develop a plan
that would enable them to be resolved over a weekend? Such a ‘shelf
bankruptcy’ plan would require banks to track, and document, their exposures
much more carefully and in a timely manner, probably through much better use
of technology. The plan will need to be stress tested by regulators periodically
and supported by enabling legislation – such as one facilitating an orderly
transfer of the institution’s swap books to pre-committed partners. Not only will
the need to develop a plan give these institutions the incentive to reduce
unnecessary complexity and improve management, it will not be much more
onerous in the boom, and may indeed force management to think the unthinkable
at such times.
Let me conclude. A crisis offers us a rare window of opportunity to
implement reforms – it is a terrible thing to waste. The temptation will be to
over-regulate, as we have done in the past. This creates its own perverse
dynamic.
For as we start eliminating senseless regulations once the recovery takes
hold, we will find deregulation adds so much economic value that it further
empowers the deregulatory camp. Eventually, though, the deregulatory
momentum causes us to eliminate regulatory muscle rather than fat. Perhaps
rather than swinging maniacally between too much and too little regulation, it
would be better to think of cycle-proof regulation.
Postscript: These ideas (I cannot claim originality because these were in the air) made their way into
post-crisis regulation as contingent convertible bonds (CoCos) and living wills.
A
IV
In 2012, I wrote a longer piece in Foreign Affairs summarizing my views on the reasons for the buildup in debt before the crisis and the post-crisis recovery measures.
The True Lessons of the Great Recession
ccording to the conventional interpretation of the global economic
recession, growth has ground to a halt in the West because demand has
collapsed, a casualty of the massive amount of debt accumulated before the
crisis.
Households and countries are not spending because they can’t borrow the
funds to do so, and the best way to revive growth, the argument goes, is to find
ways to get the money flowing again. Governments that still can should run up
even larger deficits, and central banks should push interest rates even lower to
encourage thrifty households to buy rather than save. Leaders should worry
about the accumulated debt later, once their economies have picked up again.
This narrative – the standard Keynesian line, modified for a debt crisis – is
the one to which most Western officials, central bankers, and Wall Street
economists subscribe today. As the United States has shown signs of recovery,
Keynesian pundits have been quick to claim success for their policies, pointing
to Europe’s emerging recession as proof of the folly of government austerity. But
it is hard to tie recovery (or the lack of it) to specific policy interventions. Until
recently, these same pundits were complaining that the stimulus packages in the
United States were too small. So they could have claimed credit for Keynesian
stimulus even if the recovery had not materialized, saying, ‘We told you to do
more.’ And the massive fiscal deficits in Europe, as well as the European Central
Bank’s tremendous increase in lending to banks, suggest that it is not for want of
government stimulus that growth is still fragile there.
In fact, today’s economic troubles are not simply the result of inadequate
demand but the result, equally, of a distorted supply side. For decades before the
financial crisis in 2008, advanced economies were losing their ability to grow by
making useful things. But they needed to somehow replace the jobs that had
been lost to technology and foreign competition and to pay for the pensions and
health care of their aging populations. So in an effort to pump up growth,
governments spent more than they could afford and promoted easy credit to get
households to do the same. The growth that these countries engineered, with its
dependence on borrowing, proved unsustainable.
Rather than attempting to return to their artificially inflated GDP numbers
from before the crisis, governments need to address the underlying flaws in their
economies. In the United States, that means educating or retraining the workers
who are falling behind, encouraging entrepreneurship and innovation, and
harnessing the power of the financial sector to do good while preventing it from
going off track. In southern Europe, by contrast, it means removing the
regulations that protect firms and workers from competition and shrinking the
government’s presence in a number of areas, in the process eliminating
unnecessary, unproductive jobs.
THE END OF EASY GROWTH
To understand what will, and won’t, work to restore sustainable growth, it helps
to consider a thumbnail sketch of the economic history of the past sixty years.
The 1950s and 1960s were a time of rapid economic expansion in the West and
Japan. Several factors underpinned this long boom: postwar reconstruction, the
resurgence of trade after the protectionist 1930s, more educated workforces, and
the broader use of technologies such as electricity and the internal consumption
engine. But as the economist Tyler Cowen has argued, once these low-hanging
fruit had been plucked, it became much harder to keep economies humming. The
era of fast growth came to a sudden end in the early 1970s, when the OPEC
countries, realizing the value of their collective bargaining power, jacked up the
price of oil.
As growth faltered, government spending ballooned. During the good years
of the 1960s, democratic governments had been quick to expand the welfare
state. But this meant that when unemployment later rose, so did government
spending on benefits for the jobless, even as tax revenues shrank. For a while,
central banks accommodated that spending with expansionary monetary policy.
That, however, led to high inflation in the 1970s, which was exacerbated by the
rise in oil prices. Such inflation, although it lowered the real value of
governments’ debt, did not induce growth. Instead, stagflation eroded most
economists’ and policy makers’ faith in Keynesian stimulus policies.
Central banks then changed course, making low and stable inflation their
primary objective. But governments continued their deficit spending, and public
debt as a share of GDP in industrial countries climbed steadily beginning in the
late 1970s – this time without inflation to reduce its real value. Recognizing the
need to find new sources of growth, Washington, toward the end of President
Jimmy Carter’s term and then under President Ronald Reagan, deregulated many
industries, such as aviation, electric power, trucking, and finance. So did Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom. Eventually, productivity
began to pick up.
Whereas the United States and the United Kingdom responded to the slump
of the 1970s with frenetic deregulation, continental Europe made more cosmetic
reforms. The European Commission pushed deregulation in various industries,
including the financial sector, but these measures were limited, especially when
it came to introducing competition and dismantling generous worker protections.
Perhaps as a result, while productivity growth took off once again in the United
States starting in the mid-1990s, it fell to a crawl in continental Europe,
especially in its poorer and less reform-minded southern periphery. In 1999,
when the euro was introduced, Italy’s unemployment rate was 11 per cent,
Greece’s was 12 per cent, and Spain’s was 16 per cent. The resulting drain on
government coffers made it difficult to save for future spending on health care
and pensions, promises made even more onerous by rapidly aging populations.
In countries that did reform, deregulation was not an unmitigated blessing. It
did boost entrepreneurship and innovation, increase competition, and force
existing firms to focus on efficiency, all of which gave consumers cheaper and
better products. But it also had the unintended consequence of increasing income
inequality – creating a gap that, by and large, governments dealt with not by
preparing their work forces for a knowledge economy but by giving them access
to cheap credit.
DISRUPTING THE STATUS QUO
For the United States, the world’s largest economy, deregulation has been a
mixed bag. Over the past few decades, the competition it has induced has
widened the income gap between the rich and the poor and made it harder for the
average American to find a stable, well-paying job with good benefits. But that
competition has also led to a flood of cheap consumer goods, which has meant
that any income he or she gets now goes further than ever before.
During the postwar era of heavy regulation and limited competition,
established firms in the United States had grown fat and happy, enjoying massive
quasi-monopolistic profits. They shared these returns with their shareholders and
their workers. For banks, this was the age of the ‘3-6-3’ formula: borrow at 3 per
cent, lend at 6 per cent, and head off to the golf course at 3 p.m. Banks were
profitable, safe, and boring, and the price was paid by depositors, who got the
occasional toaster instead of market interest rates. Unions fought for well-paying
jobs with good benefits, and firms were happy to accommodate them to secure
industrial peace – after all, there were plenty of profits to be shared.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the dismantling of regulations and trade barriers put
an end to this cozy life. New entrepreneurs with better products challenged their
slower-moving competitors, and the variety and quality of consumer products
improved radically, altering peoples’ lives largely for the better. Personal
computers, connected through the Internet, have allowed users to entertain,
inform, and shop for themselves, and cell phones have let people stay in constant
contact with friends (and bosses). The shipping container, meanwhile, has
enabled small foreign manufacturers to ship products speedily to faraway
consumers. Relative to incomes, cotton shirts and canned peaches have never
been cheaper.
At the same time as regular consumers’ purchasing power grew, so did Wall
Street payouts. Because companies’ profits were under pressure, they began to
innovate more and take greater risks, and doing so required financiers who could
understand those risks, price them accurately, and distribute them judiciously.
Banking was no longer boring; indeed, it became the command centre of the
economy, financing one company’s expansion here while putting another into
bankruptcy there.
Meanwhile, the best companies became more meritocratic, and they paid
more to attract top talent. The top 1 per cent of households had obtained only 8.9
per cent of the total income generated in the United States in 1976, but by 2007
this had increased to nearly 25 per cent. Even as the salaries of upper
management grew, however, its ranks diversified. Compared with executives in
1980, corporate leaders in the United States in 2001 were younger, more likely
to be women, and less likely to have Ivy League degrees (although they had
more advanced degrees). It was no longer as important to belong to the right
country club to reach the top; what mattered was having a good education and
the right skills.
It is tempting to blame the ever-widening income gap on skewed corporate
incentives and misguided tax policies, but neither explanation is sufficient. If the
rise in executive salaries were just the result of bad corporate governance, as
some have claimed, then doctors, lawyers, and academics would not have also
seen their salaries grow as much as they have in recent years. And although the
top tax rates were indeed lowered during the presidency of George W. Bush,
these cuts weren’t the primary source of the inequality, either, since inequality in
before-tax incomes also rose. This is not to say that all top salaries are deserved
– it is not hard to find the pliant board overpaying the underperforming CEO –
but most are simply reflections of the value of skills in a competitive world.
In fact, since the 1980s, the income gap has widened not just between CEOs
and the rest of society but across the economy, too, as routine tasks have been
automated or outsourced. With the aid of technology and capital, one skilled
worker can displace many unskilled workers. Think of it this way: when
factories used mechanical lathes, university-educated Joe and high-schooleducated Moe were no different and earned similar paychecks. But when
factories upgraded to computerized lathes, not only was Joe more useful; Moe
was no longer needed.
Not all low-skilled jobs have disappeared. Non-routine, low-paying service
jobs that are hard to automate or outsource, such as taxi driving, hairdressing, or
gardening, remain plentiful. So the U.S. workforce has bifurcated into lowpaying professions that require few skills and high-paying ones that call for
creativity and credentials. Comfortable, routine jobs that require moderate skills
and offer good benefits have disappeared, and the laid-off workers have had to
either upgrade their skills or take lower-paying service jobs.
Unfortunately, for various reasons – inadequate early schooling,
dysfunctional families and communities, the high cost of university education –
far too many Americans have not gotten the education or skills they need. Others
have spent too much time in shrinking industries, such as auto manufacturing,
instead of acquiring skills in growing sectors, such as medical technology. As the
economists Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz have put it, in ‘the race between
technology and education’ in the United States in the last few decades, education
has fallen behind.
As Americans’ skills have lagged, the gap between the wages of the well
educated and the wages of the moderately educated has grown even further.
Since the early 1980s, the difference between the incomes of the top 10 per cent
of earners (who typically hold university degrees) and those of the middle (most
of whom have only a high school diploma) has grown steadily. By contrast, the
difference between median incomes and incomes of the bottom 10 per cent has
barely budged. The top is running away from the middle, and the middle is
merging with the bottom.
The statistics are alarming. In the United States, 35 per cent of those aged 25
to 54 with no high school diploma have no job, and high school dropouts are
three times as likely to be unemployed as university graduates. What is more,
Americans between the ages of 25 and 34 are less likely to have a degree than
those between 45 and 54, even though degrees have become more valuable in
the labour market. Most troubling, however, is that in recent years, the children
of rich parents have been far more likely to get college degrees than were similar
children in the past, whereas college completion rates for children in poor
households have stayed consistently low. The income divide created by the
educational divide is becoming entrenched.
THE POLITICIANS RESPOND
In the years before the crisis, the everyday reality for middle-class Americans
was a paycheck that refused to grow and a job that became less secure every
year, even while the upper-middle class and the very rich got richer. Wellpaying, low-skilled jobs with good benefits were becoming harder and harder to
find, except perhaps in the government.
Rather than address the underlying reasons for this trend, American
politicians opted for easy answers. Their response may be understandable; after
all, it is not easy to upgrade workers’ skills quickly. But the resulting fixes did
more damage than good. Politicians sought to boost consumption, hoping that if
middle-class voters felt like they were keeping up with their richer neighbours –
if they could afford a new car every few years and the occasional exotic holiday
– they might pay less attention to the fact that their salaries weren’t growing.
One easy way to do that was to enhance the public’s access to credit.
Accordingly, starting in the early 1990s, U.S. leaders encouraged the
financial sector to lend more to households, especially lower-middle class ones.
In 1992, Congress passed the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and
Soundness Act, partly to gain more control over Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
the giant private mortgage agencies, and partly to promote affordable
homeownership for low-income groups.
Such policies helped money flow to lower-middle-class households and
raised their spending – so much so that consumption inequality rose much less
than income inequality in the years before the crisis. These policies were also
politically popular. Unlike when it came to an expansion in government welfare
transfers, few groups opposed expanding credit to the lower-middle class – not
the politicians who wanted more growth and happy constituents, not the bankers
and brokers who profited from the mortgage fees, not the borrowers who could
now buy their dream houses with virtually no money down, and not the laissezfaire bank regulators who thought they could pick up the pieces if the housing
market collapsed. Cynical as it may seem, easy credit was used as a palliative by
successive administrations unable or unwilling to directly address the deeper
problems with the economy or the anxieties of the middle class.
The Federal Reserve abetted these short-sighted policies. In 2001, in
response to the dot-com bust, the Fed cut short-term interest rates to the bone.
Even though the overstretched corporations that were meant to be stimulated
were not interested in investing, artificially low interest rates acted as a
tremendous subsidy to the parts of the economy that relied on debt, such as
housing and finance. This led to an expansion in housing construction (and
related services, such as real estate brokerage and mortgage lending), which
created jobs, especially for the unskilled. Progressive economists applauded this
process, arguing that the housing boom would lift the economy out of the
doldrums. But the Fed-supported bubble proved unsustainable. Many
construction workers have lost their jobs and are now in deeper trouble than
before, having also borrowed to buy unaffordable houses.
Bankers obviously deserve a large share of the blame for the crisis. Some of
the financial sector’s activities were clearly predatory, if not outright criminal.
But the role that the politically induced expansion of credit played cannot be
ignored; it is the main reason the usual checks and balances on financial risktaking broke down.
Outside the United States, other governments responded differently to
slowing growth in the 1990s. Some countries focused on making themselves
more competitive. Fiscally conservative Germany, for example, reduced
unemployment benefits even while reducing worker protections. Wages grew
slowly even as productivity increased, and Germany became one of the most
competitive manufacturers in the world. But some other European countries,
such as Greece and Italy, had little incentive to reform, as the inflow of easy
credit after their accession to the eurozone kept growth going and helped bring
down unemployment. The Greek government borrowed to create high-paying
but unproductive government jobs, and unemployment came down sharply. But
eventually, Greece could borrow no more, and its GDP is now shrinking fast.
Not all European countries in trouble relied on federal borrowing and spending.
In Spain, a combination of a construction boom and spending by local
governments created jobs. In Ireland, it was primarily a housing bubble that did
the trick. Regardless, the common thread was that debt-fuelled growth was
unsustainable.
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
Since the growth before the crisis was distorted in fundamental ways, it is hard
to imagine that governments could restore demand quickly – or that doing so
would be enough to get the global economy back on track. The status quo ante is
not a good place to return to because bloated finance, residential construction,
and government sectors need to shrink, and workers need to move to more
productive work. The way out of the crisis cannot be still more borrowing and
spending, especially if the spending does not build lasting assets that will help
future generations pay off the debts that they will be saddled with. Instead, the
best short-term policy response is to focus on long-term sustainable growth.
Countries that don’t have the option of running higher deficits, such as
Greece, Italy, and Spain, should shrink the size of their governments and
improve their tax collection. They must allow freer entry into such professions
as accounting, law, and pharmaceuticals, while exposing sectors such as
transportation to more competition, and they should reduce employment
protections – moves that would create more private sector jobs for laid-off
government workers and unemployed youth. Fiscal austerity is not painless and
will probably subtract from growth in the short run. It would be far better to
phase reforms in over time, yet it is precisely because governments did not act in
good times that they are forced to do so, and quickly, in bad times. Indeed, there
is a case to be made for doing what is necessary quickly and across the board so
that everyone feels that the pain is shared, rather than spreading it over time and
risking dissipating the political will. Governments should not, however,
underestimate the pain that these measures will cause to the elderly, the youth,
and the poor, and where possible, they should enact targeted legislation to
alleviate the measures’ impact.
The United States, for its part, can take some comfort in the powerful forces
that should help create more productive jobs in the future: better information and
communications technology, lower-cost clean energy, and sharply rising demand
in emerging markets for higher-value-added goods. But it also needs to take
decisive action now so that it can be ready to take advantage of these forces. The
United States must improve the capabilities of its workforce, preserve an
environment for innovation, and regulate finance better so as to prevent excess.
None of this will be easy, of course. Consider how hard it is to improve the
match between skills and jobs. Since the housing and financial sectors will not
employ the numbers they did during the pre-crisis credit boom any time soon,
people who worked in, or depended on, those sectors will have to change
careers. That takes time and is not always possible; the housing industry, in
particular, employed many low-skilled workers, who are hard to place.
Government programmes aimed at skill building have a checkered history. Even
government attempts to help students finance their educations have not always
worked; some predatory private colleges have lured students with access to
government financing into expensive degrees that have little value in the job
market. Instead, much of the initiative has to come from people themselves.
That is not to say that Washington should be passive. Although educational
reform and universal health care are long overdue, it can do more on other
fronts. More information on job prospects in various career tracks, along with
better counselling about educational and training programmes, can help people
make better decisions before they enrol in expensive but useless programmes. In
areas with high youth unemployment, subsidies for firms to hire first-time young
workers may get youth into the labour force and help them understand what it
takes to hold a job. The government could support older unemployed workers
more – paying for child care and training – so that they can retrain even while
looking for work. Some portion of employed workers’ unemployment insurance
fees could accumulate in training and job-search accounts that could help them
acquire skills or look for work if they get laid off.
At the same time, since new business ventures are what will create the
innovation that is necessary for growth, the United States has to preserve its
entrepreneurial environment. Although the political right is probably alarmist
about the downsides of somewhat higher income taxes, significantly higher taxes
can reduce the returns for entrepreneurship and skill acquisition considerably –
for the rich and the poor alike. Far better to reform the tax system, eliminating
the loopholes and tax subsidies that accountants are so fond of finding in order to
keep marginal income tax rates from rising too much.
Culture also matters. Although it is important to shine the spotlight on
egregious unearned salaries, clubbing all high earners into an undifferentiated
mass – as the ‘1 per cent’ label does – could denigrate the wealth creation that
has served the country so well. The debate on inequality should focus on how
the United States can level up rather than on how it should level down.
Finally, even though the country should never forget that financial excess
tipped the world over into crisis, politicians must not lobotomize banking
through regulation to make it boring again. Finance needs to be vibrant to make
possible the entrepreneurship and innovation that the world sorely needs. At the
same time, legislation such as the Dodd-Frank Act, which overhauled financial
regulation, although much derided for the burdens it imposes, needs to be given
the chance to do its job of channelling the private sector’s energies away from
excess risk taking. As the experience with these new regulations builds, they can
be altered if they are too onerous. Americans should remain alert to the reality
that regulations are shaped by incumbents to benefit themselves. They should
also remember the role political mandates and Federal Reserve policies played in
the crisis and watch out for a repeat.
The industrial countries have a choice. They can act as if all is well except
that their consumers are in a funk and so what John Maynard Keynes called
‘animal spirits’ must be revived through stimulus measures. Or they can treat the
crisis as a wake-up call and move to fix all that has been papered over in the last
few decades and thus put themselves in a better position to take advantage of
coming opportunities. For better or worse, the narrative that persuades these
countries’ governments and publics will determine their futures – and that of the
global economy.
Section III
OCCASIONAL PIECES
T
I
This piece, written with Luigi Zingales (also a University of Chicago professor and my co-author for
Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists), was published in the early days of the Iraq occupation in
2003. It is quite sceptical about the prospects of building democracy in Iraq.
Capitalism Does Not Rhyme with Colonialism
he end of the Cold War marked the triumph of market democracies over
socialism and the ascendance of the United States to the position of the sole
world superpower. While this occurred more than a decade ago, only now with
Operation Iraqi Freedom are the geopolitical implications becoming clearer. The
military power now enjoyed by the United States is similar to that Western
Europe had during the second half of the 19th century. Back then European
powers went on a hunt for colonies, partly because of economic self-interest,
partly in an attempt to ‘civilize’ the rest of the world. While history is not so
boring as to repeat itself, some in U.S. policy circles genuinely believe that by
deposing rogue regimes like Iraq and planting the seeds of democracy and
capitalism in those countries, the United States can also infect neighbouring
countries and eventually remake the world in its own image. While these policy
makers would reject any parallels in motives with colonialism, they exist
nonetheless: a mix of self-interest – the world will become safer for the United
States – and idealism – it will also make the world more prosperous and liberal.
But can these policies work?
The reasoning is not without merit. Dictators like Saddam Hussein hold such
a grip on power that internal change is all but impossible. In such situations, an
outside power that truly has the interests of the people at heart can effect a
change that the people themselves cannot manage easily. Without foreign
intervention, the Franco dictatorship in Spain lasted forty years. By contrast,
military defeat brought Mussolini’s and Hitler’s regimes to a quicker end. If the
United States can overthrow a bloody dictator like Saddam Hussein in the space
of weeks and free his people, why not do it? This logic would favour an
intervention in every dictatorial country, from Cuba to North Korea, from
Venezuela to Zaire, constrained only by crass budgetary constraints.
Overthrowing a dictator, however, is only the first and easiest step toward
building a democracy. If the United States simply left Iraq at this point after
holding elections, or with a puppet government in place, there would be little to
safeguard the Iraqi people from the emergence of a new tyrant. Countries do not
fall prey to dictatorial regimes simply because of bad luck. Such countries often
have power structures in place that facilitate dictatorships: typically, dictators are
the face of a narrow elite, which has captured both political and economic
power. Change is possible only if the power structure is changed and becomes
more broad-based. Without that, any political revolution will only replace the old
tyrants with new ones.
Japan is often mentioned as a successful example of democracy imposed by
outside forces. The origins of that success, however, have to be found in the
sweeping reforms imposed by Douglas MacArthur. Before his reforms, land
holdings in Japan were concentrated and economic power was held by a few
large industrial and financial combines called the Zaibatsus. MacArthur saw
these agrarian and industrial elites gave backbone to the Japanese Nationalist
government, which had taken Japan to war. For this reason, he tried to
undermine their power. The post-war land reforms did expand and widen the
land-owning class, in the process fostering an agricultural revival, and making
Japanese democracy more stable. But even though MacArthur started to break
up the Zaibatsus, he did not have the necessary time to carry it out. The need for
reliable suppliers during the Korean War forced the government to compromise
with the Zaibatsus. This failure explains in part why the Japanese domestic
market is still so uncompetitive even though Japanese democracy is vibrant.
Nevertheless, MacArthur accomplished a lot. In part, he was helped by the
complete collapse of Japan and the utter exhaustion of its people. There was
virtually no armed resistance to the occupying authority. The Japanese held their
domestic elites responsible for initiating and prolonging the disastrous war, and
attempts to cut them down to size were not resisted, and even welcomed by the
citizenry.
The problem with a situation like Iraq’s is that the occupying forces face a
people who are neither completely subdued nor completely convinced of the
legitimacy of the occupation. Without popular legitimacy any major reform may
not stick. Worse, the exigencies of an unpopular occupation can perpetuate (and
even strengthen) the power of existing elites.
If it does not obtain the citizenry’s support, the occupying authority will have
to seek allies to control the territory – else the costs of armed occupation will
become prohibitive. These allies are typically found among powerful local
bosses, who are often the very same ones who made possible the previous
regime. In return, these bosses will seek economic favours such as government
contracts and local monopolies. In other words, if the occupying authority does
not have widespread popular support – and few foreign rulers, no matter how
noble their intentions, will have such support – its natural tendency will be to
allow mutually dependent concentrations of power to build up. If this seems
much like the concentrations of power that surrounded the previous dictatorship,
it is because of natural parallels: the dictator was also an unpopular occupier
who ruled largely by distributing privileges to a supportive few. Under these
conditions of concentrated power, it is hard for either democracy or markets to
take root.
All this is not idle theorizing. Studies show that colonies like the United
States, Canada, and Australia, where Europeans (typically the British) settled in
large numbers, often displacing or driving out native populations, developed
many of the institutions necessary for a market democracy. Government was
relatively benign, and even democratic, in large part because it did not have to
keep a native population under control. By contrast, in colonies like India where
there was too large a population to be displaced, or where disease prevented
large-scale European migration, a small body of Europeans had to keep a large
native population under check. Typically, this was done by co-opting the
domestic elites, such as the native rajas and big landlords, and supporting their
power so long as they repaid the compliment. Under these circumstances,
democratic and market institutions did not emerge. Studies show that regions in
India where these arrangements were particularly predominant have, even today,
underdeveloped social and market infrastructure.
In sum, the end of the Cold War gives the United States both the power and
the interest to spread democracy and capitalism by force. But history suggests
that democracy and free markets are hard to impose, no matter how beneficial
they are. Rarely did an occupying outside power, unconnected by the bonds of
ethnicity, culture, and national origin with the ruled citizenry, leave behind the
conditions that would foster both democracy and markets. Even in the 21st
century, capitalism does not rhyme with colonialism!
K
II
This is another of the quarterly columns for Straight Talk, written while I was at the International
Monetary Fund in 2004. It reflects my general unease with ‘magic bullet’ or quick-fix solutions to
complex problems. I find that ‘magic bullets’ often have overlooked collateral effects. The role of the
pragmatic economist is to point them out.
Clever Solution: But Will It Work?
notty problems abound in economics: For example, how can the poor
obtain access to credit? How can international economic and financial
policies help to cut short the duration of kleptocratic, despotic regimes? How can
we eliminate bank runs? And clever solutions keep bubbling up. Give the poor
formal title to their land because that will give them collateral against which to
borrow. Declare the debt issued by terrible regimes ‘odious’ and unenforceable
so that investors will be unwilling to finance such regimes in the future. Force
banks to hold only liquid, marketable instruments so that they can meet the
demands of depositors. The solutions seem ingenious, low-cost responses to the
problems posed. Yet they are rarely implemented.
Often, this is not because there is a conspiracy to ignore the solutions, but
because both the underlying causes of the problem and the ramifications of the
proposed solution are broader than have been allowed for. Not only can the
clever proposal not solve the problem, but it also has the unintended
consequence of detracting from less attractive, painful reform that is ultimately
necessary to solve it. This is not necessarily to say that one shouldn’t propose
clever ideas or try to implement them, but one should be aware that to have a
high probability of working, solutions have to be robust, that is, allow for the
possibility that the underlying problem is not the obvious one. Many clever
solutions are not robust. Consider the following example.
DOLLARIZATION AND ORIGINAL SIN
The dollarization of liabilities has become widespread in recent years. More and
more countries, banks, and firms in emerging markets issue debt denominated in
a foreign currency (typically the dollar), even though they don’t have large dollar
revenues. When a country’s currency depreciates, the resulting currency
mismatch between revenues and obligations can lead to serious consequences –
sovereign defaults, banking system meltdowns, and widespread corporate
bankruptcy.
Given these risks, why do countries persist in borrowing in foreign
currencies? One reason – referred to as the ‘original sin’ hypothesis – is that not
only do countries not have any choice now but also they can’t do anything about
it in the future. Many years ago, the country committed a horrible ‘original sin’
and ever since, investors have feared that country, refusing to accept paper
denominated in its currency. In other words, no matter how good the country’s
fiscal and monetary situation becomes, it has little hope of escaping the
rejection, albeit irrational, of the market (I should note that there are more
rational explanations for ‘original sin’ now – it is a moving target).
But recent studies show the empirical basis for this argument is shaky. Its
logic is also particularly problematic when we see investors returning to lend to
Latin American economies that had defaulted on them just a few years before.
Such historical experience suggests that investors have short memories, certainly
not ones extending over centuries or even decades. Nevertheless, the original sin
argument is politically attractive because it absolves countries of responsibility
for their current condition.
A related but more plausible explanation for the steady increase in dollarized
debt is that countries are forced into this position because their monetary policies
lack credibility. If a country issued debt in domestic currency, the argument goes,
it would have an incentive to inflate its way out of debt and would be viewed as
likely to succumb to that temptation even though its policies have recently been
on the straight and narrow. But with dollarized debt, the country wouldn’t have
this incentive, and so investors would be more willing to lend to it.
What is the clever solution? Some suggest that the World Bank or IMF issue
bonds in the country’s domestic currency and then lend the proceeds to the
country with repayment also denominated in the domestic currency. These
international financial institutions (IFI) are presumably more sensible than
market investors and aren’t fazed by original sin or misleading reputations. They
can also serve as guarantors that the country will not inflate its way out of
trouble, giving investors reasons to hold domestic currency debt that they have
issued (alternatively, the IFIs can issue debt indexed to inflation). Such proposals
have been floated in a number of forms with varying degrees of sophistication
and varying objectives. Some of the most reasonable are those by Barry
Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (‘How to eliminate original financial sin’,
Financial Times, 22 November 2002) and by Eduardo Levy Yeyati (‘Financial
de-dollarization and the role of IFIs: De-dollarizing multilateral credit’, mimeo,
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella).
Would the clever solution work? The key question is whether the
phenomenon of dollarization is driven purely by bad reputations from the past.
History suggests that countries have graduated from issuing foreign currency
debt to issuing debt denominated in domestic currency, and they have typically
done so by fixing fundamental problems like excessive deficits or a tendency to
inflate, rather than by obtaining absolution for sins from a higher power.
DOLLARIZATION AND FEAR PREMIUMS
To see whether this solution is robust, consider another explanation for
dollarization of liabilities. Typically, a country’s debt isn’t sold only to foreigners
but also to locals. This is natural, especially given that locals are more likely
than foreigners to believe they can enforce repayment. The marginal domestic
investor will care about the pattern of returns the debt offers. Finance theory
indicates that he or she will be prepared to pay more for (accept lower returns
from) a security that is expected to retain its value or go up in bad economic
times relative to a security that is expected to plummet in value. The former
security provides more insurance.
What do citizens in these investing countries want insurance against? One
major problem in an emerging market is that it’s prone to adverse economic
shocks that cause foreign lenders to stop lending, forcing a real currency
depreciation as well as high inflation in the country. Economic activity tends to
collapse, causing immense hardship for the people. Consider what happens to
the securities at this time. As long as the country doesn’t default, dollardenominated debt goes up in value because of the real depreciation, while debt
denominated in local currency falls because of inflation and depreciation.
Domestic investors who wanted protection against such crises caused by sudden
stops would prefer dollar-denominated debt because it provides valuable
insurance, and thus be willing to accept a lower rate of interest on it. (Of course,
such debt is valuable only under the reasonable belief that the government
wouldn’t default on its debt or that, even if it defaulted, it would repay in
proportion to its outstanding obligations.)
This doesn’t immediately imply that domestic issuers would rush to issue
such debt, for they would have to pay more in bad times. But even though in a
perfect world issuers would be indifferent between dollar and domestic currency
debt, in the real world, ministers, bankers, and industrial managers might not be.
Given an expected revenue stream with which to repay, the lower-interest dollar
debt will allow the minister more borrowing upfront. If the country finds itself
greatly constrained in its borrowing, dollar debt might be attractive even if a
minister isn’t myopic. If one adds the very real possibility that he doesn’t look
beyond his short term of office, a minister might be extra willing to accept the
uncertain longer-run risk for the certain short-run budgetary flexibility. Similarly
for bankers and chief executive officers of industrial firms.
In these circumstances, will the clever solution work? Absolutely not. The
IMF and the World Bank would have to pay the same risk premium when they
issue domestic currency-denominated debt as does the country. If the country
borrowed in local currency through these institutions, it would simply add a
costly layer of intermediation to its borrowing costs. That said, if international
financial institutions were willing to step in to such an extent that the country
didn’t need to borrow from its own citizens – an extremely unlikely scenario –
then the holders of the country’s debt would all be foreigners and the country
wouldn’t need to pay a premium.
One should also be careful about condemning dollarization out of hand:
banning it might seem another clever solution. Although a currency mismatch is
a severe problem in the midst of a crisis, one cannot judge the merit of actions
that led to it simply by looking at outcomes. There may be costs of banning
dollarization – such as a lower ability for a country or firm to borrow or lower
hedging possibilities. These have to be traded off against the potentially distorted
incentives for issuers to raise excessive amounts of dollar debt.
Without a clear sense of the costs and benefits, a prudent policy might be to
work on fixing the deep underlying causes while taking measures to limit the
obvious risks. The big fixes would include boosting the private saving rate so
that a country becomes less dependent on outside capital, strengthening revenue
collection and cutting expenditures in good times so a country accumulates spare
capacity for bad times and reduces the need to inflate, and increasing a country’s
ability to export its way out of sudden capital inflow stoppages. Such a policy of
‘living with dollarization’ may be neither clever nor quick but, in the long run, it
is more likely to work. Of course, such a policy is not robust if ‘original sin’ is
the true problem. Fortunately, history suggests it works.
I
III
In the following piece in 2004 in Straight Talk, I worried about the starting point for economic models,
and why it was unrealistic. Models are, by their very nature, abstractions from reality, but we always
have to ask whether in the process of abstraction we are throwing important features of the real world
away.
Assume Anarchy?
nstitutions are all the rage. The absence of institutions – such as efficient and
impartial judiciaries, legal systems to protect intellectual property, tax
administrations that are efficient and free of corruption, and credible central
banks – is offered as an explanation for some of the central puzzles in
development economics, including why so many countries do not grow fast
enough to vanquish poverty. But unfortunately, economic theory offers us little
guidance on how strong institutions are created and nurtured. And, unless we
develop a better understanding, simply reciting the mantra ‘institutions’ offers
little in the way of constructive policy advice to less developed countries,
leaving the policy arena open to other, more dubious, views. A tremendous
amount of research is now being conducted on the provenance of institutions
(including whether they are a proxy for deeper forces) but my focus here is on
why mainstream economists have neglected this in the past. In particular, I want
to ask how much blame for this neglect should be attached to the canonical
model in economics, the complete markets model.
In this theoretical model, which every graduate economics student encounters
in some form or other, everyone is fully informed; every eventuality is
anticipated in contracts; all contracts are enforced by omniscient, incorruptible
courts; and governments automatically take care of all the public goods and
interfere in none of the private ones. Clearly this is an abstraction even in
relation to the developed world. Yet it is regarded as a useful starting point for a
number of reasons. First, it is argued, the model is in important respects a
reasonable approximation of reality. Second, it usefully serves as a common
point of departure, deviations from which – and the fewer the better – have to be
justified. This disciplines research, preventing original but muddled thinkers
from generating results simply by making unorthodox assumptions. This enables
economists to talk to each other rather than past each other, and to see the
implications of their favourite deviation by comparing the conclusions from the
model incorporating it with the outcomes from the complete markets model.
This methodical one-step deviation approach enhances debate and understanding
(and makes refereeing for scholarly publications easier). Third, the model is
mathematically tractable and allows elegant theorems and proofs.
The point of building models is to learn about the real world by abstracting
from details that are irrelevant to the issue being considered. Without models, we
would just have descriptions. But while some abstraction is important, gross
abstraction can make a model irrelevant. And for many situations, at least in the
developing world, the complete markets model is too far distanced from reality
to be useful. Take, for example, armed conflict, which plagues many poor
countries. It is usually viewed as wasting resources and therefore being
economically inefficient. There is no room for conflict in the complete markets
paradigm: with complete markets, we would simply anticipate all possible
situations of conflict and contract them away. But in truth, an important reason
for continued conflicts in some countries is that there is simply no credible
mechanism to enforce contracts. Warlords may sign peace treaties, but knowing
they will not be enforced, exploit the ensuing peace to prepare for the next war.
How to build commitment against predation and enforce contracts at the
national level are first-order economic issues. Early economists, like Hobbes and
Locke, reflected on them, but with a few notable exceptions, economists
neglected them for many decades, in part, perhaps, because many were trained in
developed countries where the complete markets model is somewhat less absurd.
Only recently have economists returned to these questions.
Although the complete markets model can be a useful abstraction in some
circumstances, it is an intellectual straitjacket when applied universally,
particularly because it ignores the costs of contracting and enforcement.
Requiring card-carrying economists to stay within a few standard deviations of
the model may greatly hinder their ability to focus on what is essential in
environments different from the one that gave birth to the model. I say this even
though several important breakthroughs in economics in the last three decades
have come from one-step deviations, such as assuming that not everyone has the
same information (known in the jargon as ‘asymmetric information’), or that
economic activity is carried out by organizations where employees may not
share the goals of the organization (known in the jargon as ‘agency’).
One problem with relying on models that are within a few standard
deviations of the complete market model to guide policy in a poor country is that
solutions may seem far easier than they actually are. For example, in these
countries some contracts are inflexible or do not exist. The facile policy
prescription from the model is to advocate greater flexibility or to create the
missing contract. Yet there may be far deeper deficiencies that need to be
addressed in order to rectify the problem.
For example, the inflexibility of labour contracts – in particular the difficulty
of firing employees – is seen as inefficient because it does not permit firms to
react quickly to business conditions. Often, these prohibitions are ascribed to
overly strong unions that hold the economy to ransom. But if courts are slow and
corrupt, so that a worker who is wrongfully fired has no redress, perhaps the
prohibition of firing – because violations are so easily and publicly observable –
is the only way to protect workers from arbitrary decisions by employers. Job
tenure may also act as a form of social security, necessary because the
government does a miserable job providing a safety net, and private insurance
markets do not exist. Admittedly, these explanations are speculative, and the
truth may lie elsewhere. But my point is that crude, inefficient prohibitions on
firing may be a robust response to a number of deficiencies in the system, many
of which reinforce each other in subtle ways. If so, unions may command strong
popular support because of deficiencies in the system rather than be the cause of
them. This is not to say that inflexible contracts are without cost, but that altering
them may require deep-rooted reform.
Consider another example. Small entrepreneurs in developed countries often
have to pledge property as collateral for a loan. The poor in developing countries
often lack clear title to their assets – such as the land they occupy. So, some
analysts suggest, a way to give them access to finance is to give them clear title.
In practice, however, this suggestion is hard to implement when so much else
does not work. For one thing, how is the tenuous protection of existing private
property affected when squatters obtain property rights? How will informal ways
of establishing ownership by determining the historical antecedents of a
particular piece of property be misused when local thugs and politicians can
coerce the citizenry? Instead of analysing the effects of introducing contracts in a
world where everything else works, a better approach might be to investigate the
effects of introducing a legitimate contract in a world where nothing works. Our
analysis would be better informed by assuming anarchy as a starting point rather
than a pristine world of complete contracts!
I am not suggesting that policy makers do actually analyse problems with a
complete markets model in mind. They do, of course, make adjustments for the
world they confront. But their world view is naturally influenced by the
frameworks they were taught. And because those frameworks assume so much
that is unrealistic, how confident can policy makers be in their
recommendations?
Nor am I arguing for undisciplined economic thinking, for an ‘anything-goes’
school of theory. Economics has come a long way in the past half century, and
much that we have learnt is of great relevance. Respectable economists such as
Oliver Hart and Jack Hirshleifer have escaped the straitjacket of the complete
markets model without sacrificing sensible economics. But a sizeable group of
economists still thinks there is only one model, and complete markets is its
name. One cannot but help suspect that elegance rather than relevance is its
appeal.
Institution building is one area where international financial institutions and
policy makers have learned from experience and used common sense to devise
practical approaches, without much guidance from academia. And there is hope,
supported by a growing body of research work, that more students of
development are realizing that a better starting point for analysis than a world
with only minor blemishes may be a world where nothing is enforceable, where
property and individual rights are totally insecure, and the enforcement
apparatus for every contract must be derived from first principles – the world
that Hobbes so vividly depicted. Not only will this kind of work more closely
approximate reality in the poorest, conflict-ridden countries, but it could also
lead to more sensible policy.
S
IV
Another Straight Talk column, which appeared in December 2004, this time pointing out the
difficulties with a clever proposal to declare debt taken on by unpleasant regimes unpayable.
Odious or Just Malodorous?
omething terribly wrong happens when debt is incurred by a sovereign
government that does not have good claim to represent the will of the people
of the country, and its proceeds are not used for their benefit. Take the case of
South Africa under the apartheid regime, which borrowed, in part, to finance a
military machine that was used to repress the majority African population. The
debt thus incurred was doubly odious, for not only were the proceeds used to
suppress the African majority and keep the apartheid regime in power but the
suppressed also eventually ended up being responsible for the debt repayment.
The post-apartheid government accepted that responsibility. Yet, the case seems
to have all the hallmarks of a situation where ‘something ought to have been
done’ to remove the ‘odious debt.’
But what should be done in such a case? One suggestion is to institute an
international commission (say under the United Nations) that will determine
which regimes have neither popular legitimacy, nor the interests of their people
at heart. Once the commission declares the regime and its debt odious, successor
regimes could be absolved, through international agreement, of having to repay
the debt incurred by the odious regime. Also, creditor country laws could be
altered so as to make it difficult for creditors from that country to enforce debt
payment from another country once that country’s debt is declared to be odious.
The possibilities of such a mechanism are dramatic. If a commission had
declared Mobutu Sese Seko odious early on in his regime, he would not have
been able to build up Zaire’s debt to $12 billion, or to use $4 billion of it in
building his own personal assets. He might not even have lasted long in power if
he had not been able to borrow to keep his regime afloat. Certainly, the
objectives of those advocating mechanisms to declare debt ‘odious’ are
compelling (see Kremer and Jayachandran in F&D, June 2002, p. 36).
Unfortunately, the mechanism would not work as precisely as this example
suggests – it would be more of a neutron bomb than a laser-guided missile. Not
only would it make it more difficult for odious regimes to borrow, but it would
also make borrowing more difficult for any legitimate regime that had even a
remote possibility of being succeeded by an odious regime. A fledgling
democratic regime, struggling to borrow to avoid the consequences of drought,
might find the going even harder if creditors were also attempting to judge the
possibility that the regime might collapse. If the regime gave way to a nasty
successor, the debt would be declared odious, imposing huge losses on the
creditors. Anticipating this, the creditors would not lend, making regime change
more likely. How, then, does one prevent the odour of future odious debt from
polluting all prior debt and making borrowing more difficult for all countries that
have even a remote possibility of future regime change?
A clever proposal is simply to restrict odium to future debt (Kremer and
Jayachandran, 2003). In other words, successor regimes could legitimately
escape repayment only of the debt that is issued after the commission declares a
regime’s debt odious. The beauty of this idea is that markets would not be left
guessing about whether their debt would be legitimate. Moreover, to the extent
that the regime could not borrow to finance theft or build monuments to its own
glory, resources would be preserved to service the old debt, thus enhancing its
value.
But would it work? The trouble is that implementation of the proposal could
have other, unintended, consequences. Though creditors would not be forced to
guess whether the loan they made to a country would be viewed as legitimate,
they might still be left guessing whether it would be valuable. Here is why: few
developing countries or expanding firms can repay all the debt they have
contracted or even generate substantial income unless they have access to further
financing. This is because countries and firms rely on growth – a steady stream
of new projects and continuing old projects to provide both the cash flows to
service debt incurred to set up those projects as well as a residual amount – to
service older debt. Countries and firms typically grow their way out of debt.
But if future debt were declared odious, the country would no longer be able
to borrow to continue old projects, let alone finance new ones (assuming, of
course, that the odious regime was not bent on driving the country into
immediate economic collapse – if it were so destructive, few would be willing to
lend in the first place, and there would be no need for a special procedure to
declare its debt odious). Even if the odious regime had the intention of servicing
its debt, the declaration that the regime’s future debt was odious would make it
very difficult for it to do so. When coupled with the fact that the incentives to
repay debt come, in part, from the attraction of continuing to be able to borrow,
it might well be that the regime defaults on existing debt as soon as it is declared
odious, with adverse consequences for its valuation. The proposal to declare
only future debt odious might mitigate some of the concerns associated with the
original odious debt mechanisms, but it would not eliminate them by any means.
Another variant is to single out past debt that was used for nefarious purposes
such as repression or theft and declare only that odious and uncollectible (see for
example, ‘Iraq’s Odious Debts’ by Patricia Adams, Policy Analysis, 28
September 2004, Cato Institute). Such a mechanism would make lenders
responsible for the end use of their funds. But this suggestion is also not without
problems. For one, it is hard to know whether steel that is being imported will be
used to make cradles or cannons. Even guns and bullets may have legitimate
uses if the police use them to combat crime. If lenders were held responsible for
end use, they would shy away from financing a large number of legitimate
activities. Moreover, this proposal assumes that money is not fungible. What is
to prevent the government from funding roads and ports with foreign loans while
using taxpayer funds to buy tanks and submarines?
If there are potential costs to such proposals, then a re-examination of the
benefits becomes important. Would dictators really be stopped in their tracks?
Would the truly corrupt not simply sell the country’s existing assets at bargain
basement prices for cash? Would we not see an increase in trafficking in
antiques, endangered animals, wood, and drugs? Is it possible that the country
could be worse off if the dictator stole through unusual channels than if he stole
by building up debt?
The point is that while the odious debt proposal is well motivated, it is
unlikely to provide a panacea. We have to recognize there will be trade-offs – the
upfront costs to any fragile democracy from the odour of possible future odium,
weighed against the possible benefits of curbing corrupt dictators financed by
overeager bankers. If there are many odious regimes today but little chance that
currently democratic regimes will switch to being odious, the benefits of the
proposal outweigh the costs. If there are few odious regimes today, and many
possible switches, the reverse is true.
In sum then, one does not need conspiracy theories to explain why the odious
debt proposal has not gone anywhere, or why newly legitimate governments like
that of post-apartheid South Africa have accepted the responsibility of servicing
the potentially odious debts they inherited. The concern that debt markets might
be disrupted is well-founded. But there are also potential benefits that deserve
further investigation. If researchers had their way, we would pick one petty
dictator through a random draw, declare his debt odious, and watch what
happened. This suggestion is unlikely to find many takers – the notion of
experimenting with countries seems repugnant to most. So in the absence of
research that will use existing data cleverly to inform us, or fortuitous natural
experiments, it is not surprising nor even unfair that the odious debt proposal is
likely to stay in cold storage.
Many of the facts in this article are drawn from ‘Odious Debt,’ a working paper by Michael Kremer
and Seema Jayachandran, published by the National Bureau of Economic Research in the U.S. in May
2002.
N
V
One of my research forays at the IMF was into the costs and benefits of foreign aid. This was work
done with Arvind Subramanian, the Indian government’s current Chief Economic Advisor. This work
was controversial because it went against the received wisdom in developmental institutions that aid
was tremendously beneficial. This 2005 piece reports on that joint research.
Aid and Growth: The Policy Challenge
ow that developed countries and international financial institutions have
committed themselves to writing off the debt of highly indebted poor
countries, the challenge will be to convert these resources into actual growth and
faster progress toward the Millennium Development Goals. While for some it
may seem that the war against poverty can be won simply by getting rich
countries to provide more debt relief and aid, the view of experts – including
those behind recent reports by the UK Commission for Africa and the
Millennium Project – is that this is just one of the necessary ingredients. It is
early days yet in the campaign to make poverty history. If it is to succeed, we
have to recognize the failures of the past as well as be open-minded about the
solutions for the future. And the first thing to recognize is the checkered history
of aid.
AID AND GROWTH
The best way to get the poor in low-income countries out of poverty is to
strengthen economic growth in those countries. To the layperson, this may just
mean sending these countries more aid. Yet one point about which there is
general agreement amongst economists is that there is little evidence of a robust
unconditional effect of aid on growth.
Before going further, let me say that the word ‘effect’ implies causality. This
is different from correlation. It is possible to find in the data a negative
correlation between aid and economic growth, but this doesn’t mean that more
aid causes less growth. For instance, if aid tends to go to countries that are doing
badly, you would get aid and growth being negatively correlated even though aid
does not cause poor growth: the direction of causation is the reverse. This is why
economists use a technique called instrumental variables analysis to tell causality
from simple correlation. In recent papers that I have written with Arvind
Subramanian of the IMF’s Research Department, we describe how we found a
negative correlation between aid and growth when we did not use instrumental
variables, but how this essentially disappeared once we used the technique
(Rajan and Subramanian 2005 a and b). This means that aid sceptics may have
been mistaken in viewing negative correlations found in the past as supporting
their view. But unfortunately, we don’t find a robust, significant positive
correlation either.
Does this mean that aid cannot, in any circumstances, boost growth? Of
course not! The layperson’s thinking does, of course, have some significant
basis. Poor countries are short of resources and ought to be able to put aid
inflows to good use. There are case studies of countries that have grown using
aid, and specific aid projects that have helped the poor enormously. What we
economists have not identified is a reliable set of economic circumstances in
which we can say that aid has helped countries grow. And this is not for want of
trying.
For example, an influential study suggested that aid leads to growth, but only
in countries that have good governance (Burnside and Dollar 2000). This
certainly seemed a very reasonable conclusion – a necessary condition for aid to
help growth is obviously that aid receipts should not be spirited away to Swiss
bank accounts. Unfortunately, however, it doesn’t seem to be a sufficient
condition for aid to help growth, as follow-up studies suggest the finding is not
robust (Easterly, Levine, and Roodman 2004). It would appear that other levers
are needed in addition to reasonable governance for aid to be effective.
A recent study (Clemens, Radelet and Bhavnani 2004) takes another crack at
parsing the data, working from the assumption that not all aid is alike in its
impact on growth. Again, the rationale is plausible. Why, for instance, should we
expect humanitarian aid to result in growth, or why should we expect aid
devoted to education (children are a long-term project if ever there was one) to
produce growth in the short run? The study indeed shows that aid likely to have
a short-term economic impact (for instance, aid used to build roads or support
agriculture directly) is positively correlated with short-term growth. Here again,
however, I’m not fully persuaded. The authors of this study argue that the reason
to focus on short-impact aid is because the literature focuses on country growth
rates over four-year periods. So I presume it follows that if one were to depart
from the literature and look at long-run growth (say growth over decades, which
is what we really care about), economic aid (as contrasted with, say,
humanitarian aid) cumulated during the period should have a discernible effect
on growth (and there would be no need to separate out short-impact aid from
long-impact aid). My work with Subramanian suggests that economic aid does
not have a robust positive correlation with long-run growth.
Despite my own convictions about what the past tells us, I will acknowledge
that the debate about aid effectiveness is one where little is settled.
Unfortunately, further cross-country research along existing lines may not yield
credible answers. We can continue trying to find some variable that will select
out those countries that have received aid and also grown (or attempt to find
some form of aid that is positively correlated with growth). But what do we
conclude once we do that? Put another way, when the same data are pored over
many times, there is a danger we will find patterns that are there by accident.
This is why many economists have become sceptical that cross-country studies
can tell us much more.
Of course, the layperson would despair of econometrics long before the
economist. It should, however, be of concern to the layperson that the best
example we have of aid working systematically for a group of countries is the
Marshall Plan, whereby the ravaged countries of post-war Western Europe were
returned to the ranks of the rich. The reason it worked so well might be that
these countries’ institutions, including the education of their people, were
probably capable of sustaining much higher per capita GDP than their post-war
low. Perhaps this is why one might see a country emerging from conflict
experience a substantial period of catch-up growth, where aid is very effective –
Mozambique or Uganda might be more recent examples. Nevertheless, it should
be sobering that the canonical recent example of a country clawing itself out of
poverty into the ranks of the rich is South Korea. South Korea was indeed
ravaged by war, but its spectacular growth started approximately when aid
inflows tapered off.
DODGING ‘DUTCH DISEASE’
According to some, there is a better way – to focus on what we know works.
Specifically, funding should support micro-interventions or programmes,
validated through evaluations and experimentation, that might be very helpful,
say, in furthering education and health care, which undoubtedly lead to growth.
Here, we have learned a lot from work by Abhijit Banerjee of MIT, Michael
Kremer at Harvard, and their students, as well as from the World Bank,
including its World Development Report 2004.
We know that providing services to the poor isn’t just about money. One can
build spanking new schools and pay teachers a good wage, yet they may not
come in to teach. One can provide free drugs to the hospitals, intended for the
poor, but the druggist may simply sell them on the black market. This is not to
say that schools and hospitals aren’t necessary, but bricks and mortar are often
the easy part. Policy makers also need to create the right incentives for the
service provider and the poor client, as well as the right allocation of power and
information between them to ensure that reasonable quality services are
provided.And we know that the law of unintended consequences is always at
work. This means that few programmes ever operate as the designers intended,
so we need abundant experimentation, frequent monitoring and evaluation, and a
sharing of best practices so that these targeted interventions can have their
intended effect.
Unfortunately, I am not sure that even if each micro-intervention works well
by itself, they will all work well together. Interventions could affect each other
and come in each other’s way or vie for the same resources. They could also
have adverse spillover effects on the rest of the economy.
The last is not just a possibility. Suppose a lot of aid flows in to support
interventions in education, health care, and other social services. The recipient
country quickly hires many educated workers as teachers, clerks, nurses,
foremen (to build the schools), engineers, and government and aid
administrators. Because well-educated people will be in high demand, their
wages will tend to rise and may well go up rapidly. In turn, factories will have to
escalate the wages they pay to managers, engineers, and supervisors. Now
factories that produce for the domestic market and don’t face competition can
pass their higher costs on. But factories that export cannot, so they will cut down
on operations and even start shutting down. This is one example of a
phenomenon called Dutch Disease, which makes aid recipients less competitive.
Subramanian and I show that in countries that received more aid in the 1980s
and 1990s, the export-oriented, labour-intensive industries not only grew more
slowly than other industries – suggesting that aid did in fact create Dutch
Disease – but the manufacturing sector as a whole also grew more slowly. Again
it’s sobering to think that by constraining the growth of manufacturing, aid
inflows may have prevented poor countries from taking the path to growth
followed first by the East Asian tigers and now by China.
That said, Dutch Disease is not a terminal condition. It can be mitigated
through sensible policies. But to do so, one must first acknowledge its existence
and its pernicious effects. Similarly for other possible diseases caused by aid.
THERE IS HOPE
To ignore the past, or to read only rosy lessons from it, is to condemn oneself to
relive it. While it would be churlish to deny that many poor countries have made
tremendous progress in creating the conditions for sustained growth, it doesn’t
serve the citizens of poor countries either if we say that all the problems of the
past are well and truly in the past. While no one has the ‘magic bullet’ for
growth, there are some things that do seem important. These include sensible
macroeconomic management, with fiscal discipline, moderate inflation, and a
reasonably competitive exchange rate; laws and policies that create an
environment conducive to private sector activity with low transaction costs; and
an economy open for international trade. In addition, investments in health and
education, which create a population that not only lives a better life but also sees
opportunities in growth and competition, ought to be encouraged.
One way rich countries and international financial institutions can help is by
making policies that broadly meet these requirements an essential condition for
aid. They should, however, resist micromanaging and overlaying broad
economic conditionality with too many detailed economic prescriptions, or with
social and political conditionality. Once a country has the necessary broad
environment in place, it should have the freedom to chart its own path. After all,
the failure of past grand theories of growth should make us wary of becoming
overly prescriptive.
Rich countries can also help by reducing the impediments they place in the
way of poor country exports, and by coaxing these countries to lower their own
trade barriers, including barriers to other poor countries. They can spend more to
foster research on drugs and agricultural technologies that would benefit the
poorest countries. They can be more active in ensuring that their companies and
officials don’t grease the wheels of corruption in poor countries (see Birdsall,
Rodrik, and Subramanian 2005 for other suggestions). And they should never
hesitate to give humanitarian aid in the face of a disaster.
Let us draw hope from the willingness of the outside world to provide more,
and better, aid. Ultimately, though, poor countries hold their future in their own
hands. It is only through their own will and actions that the good intentions of
the outside world can be used to truly make poverty history.
I
VI
As the IMF embarked on debt relief in 2005, this article tried to lay out the circumstances under which
that made sense.
Debt Relief and Growth
n a number of developed countries, debt relief for low-income countries has
become an important political issue. Rock stars and politicians rightly point to
the overwhelming burden borne by poor countries who have to set aside a
significant fraction of their national income to repay creditors. Worse still, they
argue, much of this debt is ‘odious,’ built up by past corrupt dictators who
whisked the money to Swiss bank accounts. Furthermore, evidence that
countries with high debt tend to have low growth suggests that debt relief can
help poor countries grow.
Several debt relief proposals are on the table, but there is little agreement
among donors on which one makes the most sense. The proposals typically have
a one-size-fits-all flavour, in part because uniform treatment would avoid
politicking by potential recipients. But would poor countries benefit from
uniform treatment? This article tries to clarify some of the broad principles that
could lead to an optimal debt relief proposal.
NET FLOWS, NOT DEBT RELIEF, MATTER
Consider a poor country that has to repay $100 million to official creditors such
as developed countries or international financial institutions in the current
period. Assume it earns $50 million in foreign exchange in this period and has
no other resources. Clearly, it cannot repay the debt fully out of its own
resources. Now consider three alternative proposals. First, the creditors do not
forgive the debt, but lend $120 million to the country. Second, creditors forgive
the debt down to $50 million, but lend nothing. Third, creditors forgive the entire
debt and lend nothing. Which alternative is best for the country?
Assuming this country has no access to private capital markets, the answer
seems obvious: full debt forgiveness, which would be twice as good as half debt
forgiveness and surely better than a loan that is not much bigger than the full
debt amount. Yet when viewed in terms of net resources available to the country
during the period, under the first proposal these would amount to $70 million
(the loan of $120 million plus inflows of $50 million, less the repayment of $100
million), under the second they would amount to nothing, while under the third
they would amount to $50 million. Of immediate importance to a resourcestarved poor country is the amount of additional resources it gets in the current
period (termed ‘additionality’). The best proposal in terms of additionality is the
first, which offers no debt relief.
The point is that if official creditors take with one hand (collecting debt
service) but give more with the other (in the form of a loan), the poor country
may have more financing in the short run than with debt forgiveness. And debt
forgiveness may actually be problematic if it exhausts donor aid budgets. Of
course, without forgiveness, in the long run, the country will have more debt on
its books, which may become unsustainable. In the three proposals, the country
will end the period owing $120 million, $50 million, and nothing, respectively.
However, high or unsustainable debt is a problem only if it hurts the country’s
growth. Let us turn to that.
High debt can be detrimental to a country’s growth. It can increase the risk of
financial distress or crisis, when foreign creditors rush to cash in their claims,
resulting in the failure of banks and firms. However, if official creditors hold the
bulk of the poor country’s debt, it is unlikely they will precipitate a crisis, so the
country will not experience a meltdown no matter what its level of debt.
A second reason why a high level of debt might hurt is that it can create a
debt overhang problem. For instance, when a country has high debt outstanding,
private investors may be reluctant to invest for fear that the debt will eventually
be repaid by levying extra taxes on corporations. Similarly, the government may
hesitate to invest because the returns will largely go to service debt. Hence, high
debt can impair investment and thus growth, and reducing debt may be
necessary to jump-start growth. Compelling as these arguments may be in the
case of emerging markets, I am not convinced they are important for poor
developing countries. Investors in poor countries face other, more significant
impediments to investment, such as a discouraging business climate and uneven
regulation. A reduction in the level of government debt, without any additional
resources or policy change, is unlikely to jump-start investment.
Some analysts have indeed found a negative correlation between debt and
growth in poor countries, but there are other possible explanations. For instance,
the causality could run from low growth to high debt, with countries that have
weak growth (which may be due to poor policies) running larger deficits, and
thus borrowing more. If this is the direction of causality, then debt forgiveness
will not spur more growth, and I have yet to see compelling evidence against this
possibility. This means that for poor countries borrowing primarily from official
creditors, the extent of debt forgiveness matters only in that it increases net
resources. Sometimes more additionality – at least in the short term – can be
obtained with no debt relief, especially if forgiveness impairs donor aid budgets.
And the ‘unsustainable’ outstanding debt can eventually be dealt with through
some mix of repayment and forgiveness (when donors have more budget room).
A POSSIBLE ROLE FOR DEBT RELIEF
This is not to say debt relief never makes sense. Debt relief could effectively
provide predictable additional resources directly to the budget (via the
repayments that no longer have to be made) and could offer a way to force
coordination on conditionality among donors. Equally important, debt relief
could allow a poor country to obtain access to loans from private foreign
investors. Private investors may be unwilling to lend to a highly indebted
country for fear that the country will be unable to repay, but if official debt is
completely forgiven, they will jump in to lend, because even the worst debtor
can be trusted to service small amounts of debt. Thus, official creditors may be
able to expand a country’s access to private resources through debt forgiveness.
Would such additional resources from the private sector be beneficial? That
depends on how much official debt is left on the books, on the nature of the
recipient government, and on whether projects have a commercial or social
orientation. Clearly, if most of the official debt is forgiven, the private sector has
little need to be careful in its lending. Moreover, if the poor country’s
government is irresponsible it can build up debt again by spending on worthless
projects. As a result, the citizens of the recipient country will not benefit from
this renewed debt build-up. In addition, donor countries will likely suffer from
‘forgiveness fatigue’ the next time around. By contrast, moderate debt
forgiveness can lead to higher-quality investment as the private sector will have
to evaluate the profitability of projects carefully, which in turn can help improve
the quality of commercial projects. Of course, if projects produce a social return
but no commercial one, the private sector will likely not provide any funds, and
official aid will be necessary.
DIFFERENT SITUATIONS, DIFFERENT APPROACHES
Let us then summarize where logic leads us. If a poor country has no access to
private markets, and the investment climate is bleak, financial distress or debt
overhang are unlikely to result from high debt. A focus on debt forgiveness – as
opposed to the net incremental resources available in the short run (that is,
additionality) – is misplaced. Debt forgiveness makes sense if it generates more
resources from the private sector, but the country authorities must have the
incentive to use resources well and the private sector to lend responsibly.
Interestingly, this means that depending on the country’s situation, the status
quo, as well as any one of the three proposals I outlined, could be the best
approach for the country.
If the country’s government is thoroughly corrupt, then the status quo – no
forgiveness and no additional aid – is best, for it gives the government no official
resources to misuse and limits its ability to raise private sector funds. Aid in this
case should be distributed directly to nongovernmental organizations. If the
country has a reasonably committed government, look at the country’s primary
need. When social sector projects top the list, then what matters is the extent of
official sector net funding. Here, the first alternative – debt is not forgiven but
official creditors lend more – is best. But if most projects are commercially
viable, the second alternative – some relief but leaving enough outstanding
official debt that foreign private investors lend responsibly – may be optimal.
Finally, substantial debt forgiveness is prudent if the risk of financial distress
really is a serious problem – an unlikely eventuality. But there must be an
assurance that the country does not borrow up again from private creditors and
game the system to get further debt relief. Donor-imposed limits on borrowing
may be needed.
Political momentum in the developed world is building for offering some
form of debt relief, and while no developing country situation will fit neatly into
these categories, debt-relief proposals can be better crafted. One-size-fits-all
proposals, while politically more convenient, are unlikely to benefit recipient
countries as much as proposals that tie debt relief and additional aid to a
country’s specific situation. Of course, the more transparent the proposals and
the more quickly they can be implemented, the better off the recipients will be.
S
VII
Countries, including India, have often tried to argue for buying stakes in commodity producers in
faraway lands as a way of ensuring national security. This article in Straight Talk in December 2006
explains why that is mistaken.
The Great Game Again?
ome commentators see the desperate search by countries to acquire
commodity-producing firms in other (typically poor, developing) countries
as a repeat of the Great Game – the tussle among powers like Britain and Russia
for influence in the Middle East and Central Asia during the 19th century. In this
view, those that acquire the greatest share of commodity producers early on will
enjoy the greatest economic security in the future, as growth in China, India, and
other populous developing countries creates shortages of commodity resources.
Economic security is the new justification for purchases, such as minority stakes
in opaque companies in poorly governed countries, that would otherwise make
little business sense. In this replayed Great Game, will those who move fastest
and farthest acquire the most economic protection? Does the gain from
economic security trump common business sense?
A QUESTIONABLE BUYING SPREE
I’ll leave aside the question of whether we’re inevitably headed for a sustained
period of commodity demand outstripping supply, even though in the past such
predictions have proved unfounded. Let me take as given that such an
eventuality is possible. To simplify the argument, I’ll assume that state-owned
companies undertake the acquisitions and that all income and value obtained
flow directly to the citizens of the acquiring state – a questionable assumption at
best. Even under these strong assumptions, should a country go on an acquisition
spree to protect itself?
Precisely how an incipient imbalance between demand and supply would
play out matters. Consider the most likely situation, where a world market for a
commodity – let’s use the example of oil in what follows – continues to operate.
If there’s an incipient imbalance and oil is in fixed supply in the short run, the
market price for oil will shoot up so that demand is brought down to equal
supply.
How does ownership of foreign oil assets help? One might think that a
country that owns foreign oil can use the profits from sales to keep its domestic
price low and thus insulate the economy from high oil prices. But this doesn’t
make economic sense. The market price of oil reflects its opportunity cost.
Rather than subsidize the price in the domestic oil market (and thus give
domestic manufacturers and consumers the incentive to use too much oil, given
its true cost), it would make far better sense to let the domestic price rise to the
international price and distribute the windfall profits from oil sales to the
population.
Put differently, suppose the country exported widgets that it manufactured in
an energy-intensive way. It would be politically convenient to avoid layoffs and
continue competing in the widget market by subsidizing the oil price, using the
financial leeway from foreign oil assets. But this would eat up the oil windfall by
subsidizing both inefficient manufacturing and foreign widget buyers. A more
economical decision would be to shrink widget manufacturing (or shift to new
technologies) and use the windfall to make transfers to citizens, especially those
most affected by high prices. These citizens would thus receive additional
income when the price of oil rose: they would be hedged.
The key point is that fundamental economic decisions shouldn’t be affected
by the ownership of additional foreign oil assets. However, because of pressure
exerted by small, powerful, affected interest groups, politics will intervene and
oil windfalls will inevitably be spent in unwise subsidies. As a result, the
acquiring country will, if anything, make suboptimal economic decisions
because of the financial windfall available through hedging.
But let’s assume the country always makes the right economic decisions.
Does hedging lead to more financial security? A hedge will always look
beneficial if one looks backward after the price has risen. But if the price of oil
had fallen, citizens would have suffered a loss of income and wealth from having
bought foreign oil assets (relative to having instead invested the money
elsewhere). Assuming the foreign oil assets were priced fairly at the time of
purchase, the country benefits only when the hedge helps smooth its income and
wealth. This isn’t obviously true even for a country that relies heavily on oil.
For instance, in a large country like the United States or China, which
account for a significant portion of world demand, the world price of oil is likely
to be high when the country is growing strongly and citizens have lots of
income, whereas the price is likely to be low when the country is doing poorly.
Foreign oil assets are a bad hedge in such a case for they subtract from citizens’
income when it’s already low and add to it when it’s high. Indeed – and this may
seem heretical – the country might be better off selling its domestic oil assets to
foreigners and investing the proceeds in non-oil assets.
Even if owning oil assets is a useful hedge (as in a small, oil-consuming
country), it’s not clear that buying stakes in opaque companies in poorly
governed foreign countries is the way to go. As the oil price increases, a poorly
governed country is more tempted to expropriate foreign owners of its oil
industry through extortionary taxation or nationalization – especially if the
domestic public feels, with the benefit of hindsight and populist egging, that the
assets had been sold too cheaply in the past. The security of a country’s
ownership of oil assets in poorly governed foreign countries likely diminishes
when the oil price rises.
PLANNING FOR A BLEAK WORLD
How then should a small country hedge oil price risk? Liquid, oil-linked
financial securities in well-governed financial markets, such as oil futures traded
in developed markets, make the most sense, but not enough is available very far
out. There do, however, exist liquid, long-dated, oil-linked securities – the equity
of large oil companies. So, without being facetious, perhaps the best advice I
could offer countries seeking to hedge oil price risk is ‘Buy Exxon shares!’
If economic security isn’t the reason, why would a country want to buy large
interests in poorly managed oil companies in dangerous locations? It might make
good business sense – the target is poorly managed and can benefit from the
know-how and management the acquirer provides. But, then, this is a sound
business case for buying the asset untainted by specious claims of enhancing
national security. It’s important that the target’s price not fully discount these
future managerial improvements. For instance, targets in countries that are
international pariahs may be attractive for acquiring countries that are still
willing to do business with them because the acquisition price may be extremely
low. Otherwise, it’s hard to see how the acquirer will escape the customary fate
of acquisitions: they typically overpay and lose money in the long run.
Other reasons are less good. One is that countries fear a total market
breakdown and descent into an autarkic ‘Mad Max’ world in which oil is scarce,
no country is willing to allow trade in what it has, and there’s no world market
clearing price. It’s not clear that, if such a situation were to come to pass,
ownership of oil assets abroad would help. Most likely, the governments within
whose borders those assets lay would expropriate the assets. Each country would
have only oil assets that are physically within its political borders. Indeed, to
protect against such a bleak world, a country would do well to increase
exploration, the use of alternative energy sources, consumption and production
efficiency, and the storage of reserves within its own borders (regardless of who
owns the assets) while increasing the economy’s flexibility to respond to oil
supply disruptions.
Even in such a bleak world, it’s hard to imagine the market breaking down
totally or for long. Indeed, one can imagine black marketers and smugglers
buying where oil is cheap and transporting it to sell to countries where oil is
costly. Unless governments build leakproof barriers around their countries – the
costs would likely be prohibitive – an implicit world price would be reestablished. We would then be back to the case we’ve already examined.
Another bad motive might be that state-owned commodity companies are
flush with profits that they’d otherwise have to return to the government. What
better way for management to spend those profits than to build foreign empires,
justifying the acquisitions with the time-honoured ‘it’s in the national interest’?
Of course, sweetening any such rationale would be any ‘under the table’
payments to acquiring managers if the transaction is non-transparent.
*
The best way to secure the supply of a commodity is to ensure that the world
market for that commodity is well informed and competitive and that the
business environment is transparent and predictable. Information on reserves and
investments helps market participants make sound business decisions.
Competition keeps participants honest and prices informative, and allows
consumers to reap the benefits. A predictable business environment allows
businesses to invest for the long term. Transparency not only reduces the costs
associated with corruption but also protects businesses from future accusations
of having obtained overly sweet deals.
The bottom line is that the new mercantilism – I own more of others than
they own of me – appealing as it may be, is not going to lead to more national
security. Countries are collectively most secure if the control of productive assets
is in the hands of those who can manage them best. Indeed, anyone who takes or
keeps control of an asset that someone else can manage more productively is
contributing to both individual and collective insecurity. The Great Game
exacerbated insecurity even as each power tried to secure itself. Let’s hope that
better sense will prevail this time.